IMPROVING MUSIC GENRE CLASSIFICA TION FROM MULTI-MODAL PROPERTIES OF
MUSIC AND GENRE CORRELATIONS PERSPECTIVE
Ganghui Ru‡, Xulong Zhang‡, Jianzong Wang∗, Ning Cheng, Jing Xiao
Ping An Technology (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd., China
ABSTRACT
Music genre classification has been widely studied in past
few years for its various applications in music information
retrieval. Previous works tend to perform unsatisfactorily,
since those methods only use audio content or jointly use au-
dio content and lyrics content inefficiently. In addition, as
genres normally co-occur in a music track, it is desirable to
capture and model the genre correlations to improve the per-
formance of multi-label music genre classification. To solve
these issues, we present a novel multi-modal method lever-
aging audio-lyrics contrastive loss and two symmetric cross-
modal attention, to align and fuse features from audio and
lyrics. Furthermore, based on the nature of the multi-label
classification, a genre correlations extraction module is pre-
sented to capture and model potential genre correlations. Ex-
tensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed method
significantly surpasses other multi-label music genre classi-
fication methods and achieves state-of-the-art result on Mu-
sic4All dataset.
Index Terms — music genre classification, multi-label,
multi-modal, symmetric cross-modal attention, contrastive
loss
1. INTRODUCTION
With the growing prosperity of digital music market, how to
correctly classify music genres has become an urgent prob-
lem. In various tasks of music information retrieval (MIR),
music genre classification (MGC) is one of the oldest and
most important tasks, and has become a research hotspot due
to its wide application prospects. However, since the com-
plex nature and diverse expressions of music tracks, music
usually has more than one genre category, characterizing a
multi-label classification problem. Compared with conven-
tional MGC task, multi-label MGC is more challenging due
to the combinatorial nature of the output space.
Early studies [1, 2] on MGC task were based on digital
signal processing and traditional machine learning methods,
which use some hand-crafted features as inputs. Limited by
the ability of representation, it is difficult for these methods
‡These authors contributed equally to this work.
∗Corresponding author: Jianzong Wang, jzwang@188.com.
to extract deep and abstract information. Recently, meth-
ods based on deep learning gradually become mainstream,
showing great potential. Some studies [3, 4, 5] contributed
to MGC task using CNN or RNN. These methods usually
used single information (uni-modal) such as audio or lyrics,
thus leading to prone to performance bottlenecks. With the
rapid development of computing resources, many MIR tasks
have evolved from uni-modal to multi-modal. Some studies
[6, 7, 8] utilized both audio content and text content of a
music track for music genre classification. Especially, [9]
proposed a multi-modal method with the hierarchical cross-
attention network for music emotion recognition. In [10],
Vatolkin et al. analyzed the impact of six different modalities
on the MGC task, including audio signals, lyric texts, album
cover images, audio semantic tags, playlist co-occurrences,
and symbolic MIDI representations. Although the methods
mentioned above have achieved certain success by simple
fusion of multi-modal features, they ignore that features
from different modalities are inherently heterogeneous and
misaligned. To address this issue, we propose a novel multi-
modal method leveraging audio-lyrics contrastive loss and
two symmetric cross-modal attention, to align and fuse the
features from audio and lyrics.
In order to improve the performance of multi-label MGC,
in addition to using the multi-modality nature of music, we
can also start from the nature of the multi-label problem. To
address the multi-label classification problem, the easiest way
is to treat each genre individually. However, this approach is
inherently limited because it ignores the potential genre corre-
lations which can be approximated as co-occurrence and mu-
tual exclusion. As this correlation is essentially a topological
structure, we design a genre correlations extraction module to
capture and model it.
This paper has the following main contributions: 1) we
propose a novel multi-modal approach leveraging audio-
lyrics contrastive loss and two symmetric cross-modal atten-
tion, to align and fuse the features from audio and lyrics; 2)
based on the nature of the multi-label classification problem,
we design a genre correlations extraction module which can
capture and model the potential genre correlations. 3) our
proposed method significantly surpasses the previous meth-
ods and achieves state-of-the-art performance on Music4All
dataset.
ICASSP 2023 - 2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) | 978-1-7281-6327-7/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP49357.2023.10097241
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wolverhampton. Downloaded on March 13,2026 at 04:29:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

audio
lyrics
audio
encoder
lyrics
encoder
A-L loss Flatten
FC
...
Multi-label loss
Music representation learning moduleMulti-modal fusion module
audio  
cross-modal 
attention 
lyrics  
corss-modal 
attention 
Q
K
K
V
V
Q
Genre correlations extraction module
...
genre embedding
n x d n x n
&
......
...
correlation matrix
......
...
...
n 
GCN ...
Fig. 1. Architectures of our proposed model, which consists of three modules: music representation learning module, multi-
modal fusion module, and genre correlations extraction module.
2. METHOD
As illustrated in Figure 1, our model consists of three main
modules: music representation learning module, multi-modal
fusion module, and genre correlations extraction module.
The music representation learning module extracts features
from audio and lyrics modalities respectively. Furthermore,
an audio-lyrics contrastive loss (A-L loss) is applied to align
features obtained from different modalities before sending
them into the multi-modal fusion module. The multi-modal
fusion module is composed of two symmetrical mechanisms
and efficiently fuses different features. The genre correlations
extraction module starts from the nature of the multi-label
problem and uses a graph convolution network (GCN) to
model potential correlations between genres. Finally, a clas-
sifier takes the dot-product of the fused feature representation
and the embeddings of genre categories as input to predict
genres.
2.1. Music Representation Learning Module
The music representation learning module consists of an
audio encoder and a lyrics encoder, which takes audio and
lyrics as input and outputs corresponding features respec-
tively. According to the pre-processing procedure adopted in
[11], the audio is cropped to 30 seconds and preprocessed to
a Mel-spectrogram with 22050HZ sampling rate, 512 hop-
size, and 128 Mel-filters. Compared with waveform audio,
Mel-spectrogram has two advantages: 1) it is designed based
on the theory of human aural perception and instrument fre-
quency range; 2) it can significantly reduce the amount of
data that the network needs to process.
Considering the powerful feature extraction capabilities
of convolutional neural networks, we refer to [9] to develop
the audio encoder that consists of five convolutional blocks,
whose input is the preprocessed Mel-spectrogram and output
is the abstract audio features.
As we all know, BERT model [12] has a strong ability to
extract text information, which has been confirmed in many
NLP tasks. Therefore, BERT model is used as the lyrics en-
coder and its structure is not changed or improved. Consider-
ing that BERT model requires a large amount of text corpus
for training, we directly use the pre-trained BERT model and
freeze its parameters.
2.2. Multi-modal Fusion Module
It is crucial to effectively fuse features from different modal-
ities in multi-modal approaches. Since it is difficult for
methods based on concatenation or element addition to make
the information interaction between different modalities,
we design a novel multi-modal fusion module which con-
sists of two symmetric cross-modal attention to effectively
fuse multi-modal features. The cross-modal attention is an
extended application of self-attention [13] on multi-modal
tasks, which emphasizes important parts of features by com-
puting similarity between different features. The calculation
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wolverhampton. Downloaded on March 13,2026 at 04:29:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

formula of cross-modal attention is:
Attention(Qα, Kβ, Vβ) = sof tmax(
QαK T
β√
d
)Vβ (1)
where α and β denote different modalities. Considering that
both audio and lyrics contribute significantly to genre clas-
sification, our proposed two symmetric cross-modal atten-
tion consists of audio cross-modal attention and lyrics cross-
modal attention. In audio cross-modal attention, Query is ob-
tained from audio feature, and both Key and Value are ob-
tained from lyrics feature. It is the opposite in lyrics cross-
modal attention.
2.3. Genre Correlations Extraction Module
How to effectively capture and model the correlations be-
tween genres to improve the classification performance is es-
pecially important for multi-label MGC task. Considering
that this correlation is essentially a topological structure, we
design a graph convolution network [14] which is well suited
to handle discrete topological data to model the genre correla-
tions. The graph convolution network takes a set of nodes and
the corresponding adjacency matrix as inputs, and outputs the
updated nodes. A pre-trained BERT [12] model is used to
encode genre names as semantic embedding and treat them
as genre node features. The correlation matrix is obtained by
calculating the co-occurrence conditional probability, and its
calculation formula is:
A(1)
ij = P (Lj|Li) = N (LiLj)
N (Lj) (2)
where N (Lj) is the number of occurrences of genre j, and
N (LiLj) denotes the concurring times of genre i and genre
j. However, this statistical conditional probability is deter-
mined by the distribution of samples in the training set, which
can be influenced significantly by noise and class imbalance.
Genre names have inherent textual information because they
are summed up based on musical and cultural understand-
ings. Therefore, we utilise the similarity matrix to alleviate
the shortcomings of the co-occurrence conditional probabil-
ity matrix. The similarity matrix is obtained by computing
the cosine similarity between node features, which represents
the proximity of genre names in the semantic space. The cal-
culation formula of similarity matrix is as follows:
A(2)
ij = cos(Fi, Fj) = Fi ∗ Fj
||Fi||2 · ||Fj||2
(3)
where Fi and Fj denote the feature of node i and node j, and
cos(·) is the cosine similarity function. The correlation matrix
is then defined as A = 1
2 (A(1) + A(2)).
2.4. Contrastive Audio-lyrics Alignment
In MGC task, existing multi-modal methods directly fuse
features obtained from different modalities without consider-
ing the alignment between these modalities. However, These
methods lead to less satisfactory fusion because they ignore
that features from different modalities are inherently hetero-
geneous and misaligned. To address this issue, we propose an
audio-lyrics contrastive loss to align features obtained from
different modalities. Specifically, given the embedding of au-
dio and lyrics, we optimize a similarity function s(·) between
audio A and lyrics L:
s(A, L) = ga(Ea) · gl(El) (4)
where ga(·) and gl(·) are linear projection layers which
transform the embedding Ea and El to a low-dimensional
space. Following [15, 16, 17], for each input audio-lyrics pair
⟨Ai, Li⟩, the audio-lyrics contrastive loss is composed of two
symmetric terms, audio-to-lyrics term:
LA→L = − log exp(s(Ai, Li)/τ )PB
j=1 exp(s(Ai, Lj)/τ )
(5)
and lyrics-to-audio term:
LL→A = − log exp(s(Li, Ai)/τ )PB
j=1 exp(s(Li, Aj)/τ )
(6)
where B is the batch size and τ is a adaptive parame-
ter. The audio-lyrics contrastive loss is then defined as
LA−L = 1
2 (LA→L + LL→A).
To enable the whole model to be trained end-to-end, we
also adopted the commonly used BCE loss as the multi-label
loss. The final training loss is the weighted sum of LA−L and
LBCE , which can be defined as:
L = λLA−L + (1 − λ)LBCE (7)
where λ is a hyperparameter that is used to balanceLA−L and
LBCE .
3. EXPERIMENTS
3.1. Experimental Setup
We use Music4All dataset [18] to train and test our model.
Considering that Music4All dataset is noisy and contains mul-
tiple languages in music lyrics, we filtered out music tracks
with missing information or non-English lyrics in our exper-
iment. 43650 samples with 87 genre categories are finally
selected and are split into 3 subsets with approximately 70%,
10%, and 20% samples respectively. In the experiment, we
set the learning rate to 0.0001 and decays by half every 50
epochs, and set the batch size to 16. Following [11, 18], ac-
curacy and F-measure are adopted to evaluate our proposed
model.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wolverhampton. Downloaded on March 13,2026 at 04:29:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Table 1. Comparison with other multi-modal methods on
Music4All dataset.
Method Accuracy F-measure
Santana’s model [18] 0.354 0.419
Pandeya’s model [11] 0.387 0.442
Our proposed model 0.456 0.534
Table 2. Ablation studies on three components. A-L loss,
SCMA, and GCEM denote audio-lyrics contrastive loss, two
symmetric cross-modal attention, and genre correlations ex-
traction module respectively.
A-L loss SCMA GCEM Accuracy F-measure
0.372 0.438
✓ 0.396 0.475
✓ 0.408 0.491
✓ 0.403 0.487
✓ ✓ 0.425 0.513
✓ ✓ 0.419 0.508
✓ ✓ 0.437 0.515
✓ ✓ ✓ 0.456 0.534
3.2. Results and Analysis
In order to compare fairly with other multi-label MGC meth-
ods, we reproduced Pandeya’s model [11] and Santana’s
model [18] on the filtered dataset with the same experimen-
tal settings. The comparison results with other multi-modal
methods are shown in Table 1. Our model achieves 0.456 in
accuracy and 0.534 in F-measure, which significantly outper-
forms previous models by a large margin. Santana’s model
achieves the worst results because it only used audio informa-
tion, which indicates that multi-modal information is crucial
for improving the classification performance of multi-label
MGC methods. Pandeya’s model uses both audio informa-
tion and lyrics information as input and shows the state-of-art
performance in multi-label MGC task. However, this method
does not achieve substantial performance gains (only from
0.354 to 0.387) in accuracy. This is mainly because it simply
concatenates the features from different modalities, and does
not consider the differences between modalities.
3.3. Ablation Study
1) three key components: We conducted a set of ablation
experiments to evaluate three key components: audio-lyrics
contrastive loss (A-L loss), symmetric cross-modal attention
(SCMA), and genre correlations extraction module (GCEM).
Table 2 reports the ablation results. We find that the
baseline model without any components shows the worst
performance, only achieving 0.372 in accuracy and 0.438
in F-measure. In contrast, no matter which component is
added, the performance of the model increases accordingly,
indicating that all three components contribute to the model’s
(a) accuracy
 (b) F-measure
Fig. 2. The accuracy and F-measure of our proposed model
when using different λ. The horizontal and vertical coordi-
nates represent the value of λ and the performance of the
model, respectively.
performance. Interestingly, we observe that adding A-L loss
or SCMA achieves 0.396 or 0.408 in accuracy respectively,
which both surpass the baseline model. This implies that
both feature alignment and effective fusion strategies help to
eliminate disparity. In addition, it is notable that additional
GCEM brings considerable improvement in the relevant abla-
tion experiments, justifying the exploration of the correlation
between genres. In all ablation experiments, we find that
the most complete model achieves the best results, indicating
that the three components can be combined flexibly without
conflict.
2) different λ in training loss: Figure 2 shows the perfor-
mance of our proposed model when using different λ in Eq.
7. We find that with the change of λ, both accuracy and F-
measure increased first and then decreased, and achieved the
maximum value when λ=0.3. This demonstrates that proper
A-L loss can help improve the performance of classification.
It is notable that the model fails to converge when λ=1.0,
which shows that the multi-label loss is crucial to the con-
vergence of the model.
4. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we improve multi-label music genre classifica-
tion from multi-modal properties of music and genre corre-
lations perspective and have presented a novel multi-modal
method leveraging audio-lyrics contrastive loss and two sym-
metric cross-modal attention, to align and fuse features from
audio and lyrics. Furthermore, a graph convolution network
is proposed to capture and model potential genre correlations.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed method
significantly surpasses other multi-label MGC methods and
achieves state-of-the-art result on Music4All dataset.
5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Supported by the Key Research and Development Program
of Guangdong Province (grant No. 2021B0101400003) and
Corresponding author is Jianzong Wang (jzwang@188.com).
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wolverhampton. Downloaded on March 13,2026 at 04:29:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

6. REFERENCES
[1] Michael I. Mandel and Daniel P. W. Ellis, “Song-level
features and support vector machines for music classifi-
cation,” in International Society for Music Information
Retrieval Conference, 2005.
[2] James Bergstra, Norman Casagrande, Dumitru Erhan,
Douglas Eck, and Bal´azs K´egl, “Aggregate features and
adaboost for music classification,” Machine learning,
vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 473–484, 2006.
[3] Chia-Hung Yeh, Wen-Yu Tseng, Chia-Yen Chen, Yu-
Dun Lin, Yi-Ren Tsai, Hsuan-I Bi, Yu-Ching Lin, and
Ho-Yi Lin, “Popular music representation: chorus de-
tection & emotion recognition,” Multimedia tools and
applications, vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 2103–2128, 2014.
[4] Nikki Pelchat and Craig M Gelowitz, “Neural network
music genre classification,” Canadian Journal of Elec-
trical and Computer Engineering , vol. 43, no. 3, pp.
170–173, 2020.
[5] Zain Nasrullah and Yue Zhao, “Music artist classi-
fication with convolutional recurrent neural networks,”
in 2019 International Joint Conference on Neural Net-
works (IJCNN). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–8.
[6] Sergio Oramas, Francesco Barbieri, Oriol Nieto Ca-
ballero, and Xavier Serra, “Multimodal deep learn-
ing for music genre classification,” Transactions of the
International Society for Music Information Retrieval.
2018; 1 (1): 4-21., 2018.
[7] Rafael B Mangolin, Rodolfo M Pereira, Alceu S Britto,
Carlos N Silla, Val´eria D Feltrim, Diego Bertolini, and
Yandre MG Costa, “A multimodal approach for multi-
label movie genre classification,” Multimedia Tools and
Applications, pp. 1–26, 2020.
[8] Wanglei Shi and Shuang Feng, “Research on music
emotion classification based on lyrics and audio,” in
2018 IEEE 3rd Advanced Information Technology, Elec-
tronic and Automation Control Conference (IAEAC) .
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1154–1159.
[9] Jiahao Zhao, Ganghui Ru, Yi Yu, Yulun Wu,
Dichucheng Li, and Wei Li, “Multimodal music emo-
tion recognition with hierarchical cross-modal attention
network,” in 2022 IEEE International Conference on
Multimedia and Expo (ICME). IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–6.
[10] Igor Vatolkin and Cory McKay, “Multi-objective in-
vestigation of six feature source types for multi-modal
music classification,” Transactions of the International
Society for Music Information Retrieval , vol. 5, no. 1,
2022.
[11] Yagya Raj Pandeya, Jie You, Bhuwan Bhattarai, and
Joonwhoan Lee, “Multi-modal, multi-task and multi-
label for music genre classification and emotion regres-
sion,” in 2021 International Conference on Information
and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC) .
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1042–1045.
[12] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirec-
tional transformers for language understanding,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[13] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser,
and Illia Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems , vol.
30, 2017.
[14] Thomas Kipf and Max Welling, “Semi-supervised clas-
sification with graph convolutional networks,” ArXiv,
vol. abs/1609.02907, 2016.
[15] Pin Jiang and Yahong Han, “Reasoning with heteroge-
neous graph alignment for video question answering,”
in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial In-
telligence, 2020, vol. 34, pp. 11109–11116.
[16] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sas-
try, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al.,
“Learning transferable visual models from natural lan-
guage supervision,” inInternational Conference on Ma-
chine Learning. PMLR, 2021, pp. 8748–8763.
[17] Dongxu Li, Junnan Li, Hongdong Li, Juan Carlos
Niebles, and Steven CH Hoi, “Align and prompt: Video-
and-language pre-training with entity prompts,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 4953–4963.
[18] Igor Andr ´e Pegoraro Santana, Fabio Pinhelli, Juliano
Donini, Leonardo Catharin, Rafael Biazus Mangolin,
Val´eria Delisandra Feltrim, Marcos Aur´elio Domingues,
et al., “Music4all: A new music database and its appli-
cations,” in 2020 International Conference on Systems,
Signals and Image Processing (IWSSIP) . IEEE, 2020,
pp. 399–404.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Wolverhampton. Downloaded on March 13,2026 at 04:29:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 