SOURCE: Barlaug and Gulla - 2021 - Neural Networks for Entity Matching A Survey.pdf
PAGES: 38


===== PAGE 1 =====
. . Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3442200 . . RESEARCH-ARTICLE Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey NILS BARLAUG, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Trøndelag, Norway . JON ATLE GULLA . . . Open Access Support provided by: . Norwegian University of Science and Technology . PDF Download 3442200.pdf 12 March 2026 Total Citations: 88 Total Downloads: 1535 . . Published: 21 April 2021 Accepted: 01 December 2020 Revised: 01 September 2020 Received: 01 March 2020 . . Citation in BibTeX format . . ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD), Volume 15, Issue 3 (June 2021) hps://doi.org/10.1145/3442200 EISSN: 1556-472X .

===== PAGE 2 =====
52 Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey NILS BARLAUG,Cognite and NTNU JON ATLE GULLA,NTNU Entity matching is the problem of identifying which records refer to the same real-world entity. It has been actively researched for decades, and a variety of different approaches have been developed. Even today, it remains a challenging problem, and there is still generous room for improvement. In recent years, we have seen new methods based upon deep learning techniques for natural language processing emerge. Inthissurvey,wepresenthowneuralnetworkshavebeenusedforentitymatching.Specifically,weidentify which steps of the entity matching process existing work have targeted using neural networks, and provide an overview of the different techniques used at each step. We also discuss contributions from deep learning in entity matching compared to traditional methods, and propose a taxonomy of deep neural networks for entity matching. CCS Concepts: •Computing methodologies→ Neural networks; Natural language processing;• Infor- mation systems→ Entity resolution; Additional Key Words and Phrases: Deep learning, entity matching, entity resolution, record linkage, data matching ACM Reference format: Nils Barlaug and Jon Atle Gulla. 2021. Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey.ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data15, 3, Article 52 (April 2021), 37 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3442200 1 INTRODUCTION Our world is becoming increasingly digitalized. While this opens up a number of new, exciting opportunities, it also introduces challenges along the way. A substantial amount of the value to beharvestedfromincreaseddigitalizationdependsonintegratingdifferentdatasources.Unfortu- nately,manyoftheexistingdatasourcesonewishestointegratedonotshareacommonframeof reference. For example, let us say a factory wants to use statistics from equipment maintenance logs to decide which equipment to prioritize for upgrades. Currently, at this factory, equipment inventoryiskeptinonesystem,whilemaintenancelogsarekeptinaseparatesystem.Sadly,these two systems do not refer to equipment in the same way, i.e., there are no common identifiers or names across the two systems. While it is possible for a human to identify which maintenance This work is supported by Cognite and the Research Council of Norway under project 298998. Authors’ addresses: N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla, Department of Computer Science, NTNU, Sem Sælands vei 9, Trondheim, 7034, Norway; emails: {nils.barlaug, jon.atle.gulla}@ntnu.no. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions frompermissions@acm.org. © 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 1556-4681/2021/04-ART52 $15.00 https://doi.org/10.1145/3442200 ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 3 =====
52:2 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla logs belong to which equipment in the inventory system, there is no simple, automatic way to tie the maintenance logs to the inventory records. Entity matching is the field of research dedicated to solving the problem of identifying which records refer to the same real-world entity. It is an important data integration task that often arises when data originate from different sources. The records are usually assumed to either be from two different data sources without duplicates or from the same data source with duplicates. It is not a new problem. A group of similar problems has been studied for a long time in a variety offieldsunder differentnames (seeSection 2).Despitehavingbeenresearchedfordecades,entity matchingremainsachallengingprobleminpractice.Thereareseveralfactorsthatmakeitdifficult in general: — Poor data quality:Real-world data are seldom completely clean, structured, and homo- geneous. Data originating from manual insertion can contain typos, alternative spellings, or fail to comply with the schema (e.g., mixing first and last name). Automatic processes extracting information from unstructured sources might not always be accurate on the scope of attributes (e.g.,{firstName: “John Smith ”; lastName: “Programmer”}). Fur- thermore, some data might simply be missing. Data in entity matching are often assumed to be structured in records. However, it is not unusual that these records are in practice semi-structured because of certain unstructured string attributes—opening up a world of possible inconsistencies—for example, aname attribute (“John Smith, ”“Smith, John, ” “John R. Smith, ”“John Richard Smith ”) or anaddress attribute. In addition, we can- not always expect different data sources to follow the same schema, format, and syntactic conventions. — The large number of possible matches:Given|A| records from one data source and |B|∈Θ(|A|) from another, there areΘ(|A|2) possible matches. We would normally expect the number of positive matches to beO(|A|). This has two important implications. First, it is infeasible to explicitly compare all possible pairs for any nontrivial number of records. Second,thereisanextremeimbalancebetweenpositiveandnegativematches;morespecif- ically, there areΩ(|A|) times as many negative as positive matches. The potential for false positives is inherently greater. If one wants to use a learning-based approach, it can be dif- ficulttolabelenoughpositiveexamples,sincetheyoccurinanoceanofnegativeexamples. — Dependency on external human knowledge and interaction:The space of potential entitymatchingprobleminstancesis unboundedandoffersgreat variety.Whilea substan- tialpartoftheinstancescanofcourse,intheory,besolvedautomatically,inmanyreal-world instances,itiseitherunrealisticorimpossibletoperformmatchingasanautomatic,isolated process, as the data sources simply do not contain all necessary information. Moreover, to perform matching, our solution has to interact with human experts and make use of their knowledge. Human interaction is in itself a complex domain. Deep learning has in recent years become an essential part of multiple research fields, most notably in fields such as computer vision and natural language processing, which are concerned withunstructureddata.Itsmostprominentadvantageoverearlierapproachesisitsabilitytolearn featuresinsteadofrelyingoncarefullyhandcraftedfeatures[ 55].Researchershavealreadyrealized the potential advantage of deep learning for entity matching [e.g.,24, 65]. In this survey, we aim to summarize the work done so far in the use of neural networks for entity matching. 1.1 Research Questions One of the challenges of comparing how neural networks are used in entity matching is that published methods often do not address the exact same problem. They tend to cover somewhat ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 4 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:3 different aspects of entity matching. With this is in mind, we formulate the following research questions: —How do methods using neural networks for entity matching differ in what they solve, and how do the methods that address the same aspects differ in their approaches? —What benefits and opportunities does deep learning provide for entity matching, and what challenges does it pose? —How can we categorize the different deep neural networks used for entity matching? 1.2 Main Contributions To answer our research questions, we provide the following main contributions: —Weuseareferencemodelofthetraditionalentitymatchingprocesstoidentifywhichsteps of process that existing work has targeted using neural networks and provide an overview of the different techniques that are used for each step. —We discuss the contributions of deep learning to entity matching compared to traditional approaches using a proposed reference model for a deep learning-based entity matching process. —We propose a taxonomy of deep neural networks for entity matching. —Wediscusschallengesandproposepotentialfutureworkfordeeplearninginentitymatch- ing understood in the context of our reference entity matching process and deep network taxonomy. 1.3 Outline First, as necessary background information, Section2 will introduce the problem definition and give a brief introduction to neural networks. Section3 mentions related work—both publications that survey or summarize similar topics and problems that are similar to entity matching. We thenprovideanoverviewofthesurveyedmethodsusingareferencemodeloftheentitymatching process as a framework in Section4, before we in Section5 take a step back and discuss contri- butions from deep learning to entity matching compared to more traditional approaches. With those contributions in mind, we introduce a taxonomy of deep neural networks for entity match- ing in Section6. Section7provides a brief overview of how evaluation is performed and reported comparative evaluations between deep learning approaches and traditional methods. Finally, we discuss challenges and opportunities for deep learning in entity matching in Section8. 2 BACKGROUND Thissectionintroducestheentitymatchingproblemdefinitionanditsmanynamesandvariations. What follows is a brief introduction to neural networks and deep learning and how they are used with text. 2.1 Problem Definition Let A and B be two data sources.A has the attributes(A1,A2,..., An), and we denote records as a = (a1,a2,..., an)∈A. Similarly,B has the attributes(B1,B2,..., Bm), and we denote records as b = (b1,b2,..., bm)∈B.Adatasourceisasetofrecords,andarecordisatuplefollowingaspecific schema of attributes. An attribute is defined by the intended semantics of its values. SoAi = Bj if a n do n l yi fv a l u e sai ofAi are intended to carry the same information as valuesbj of Bj, and the specific syntactics of the attribute values are irrelevant. Attributes can also have metadata (like a name) associated with them, but this does not affect the equality between them. We call the tuple of attributes(A1,A2,..., An),the schema of data sourceA, and correspondingly forB. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 5 =====
52:4 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla Table 1. Some of the Many Names that are Used for Entity Matching or Similar Variations of It Entity matching Entity resolution Record linkage Data matching Data linkage Reference reconciliation String matching Approximate string matching Fuzzy matching Fuzzy join Similarity join Deduplication Duplicate detection Merge-purge Object identification Re-identification The goal of entity matching is to find the largest possible binary relationM⊆A×B such that a and b refer to the same entity for all(a,b)∈M. In other words, we would like to find all record pairs across data sources that refer to the same entity. We define an entity to be some- thing of unique existence.1 Attribute values are often assumed to be strings, but that is not al- ways the case. It is important to note that the two record sets need not necessarily have the same schema. Aspectsbeyondwhatthesurveyedmethodscoverhavebeenintentionallyleftout.Forexample, wemakenomatcheswithineachdatasource,onlyacrossthetwo.Whichisnottosaytherecannot beduplicateswithinadatasource.However,inthisproblemdefinition,weassumethatwearenot interestedinfindingthem.Inpractice,itisquitecommontoassumenoduplicateswithinthedata sources.Ifweareexplicitlyinterestedinfindingduplicateswithinasingledatasource,wecan,as will be mentioned below, address duplicates in this formulation of the problem by simply having A = B. In addition, there is also a more subtle assumption in this problem definition: the record setsA andB areassumedtooperatewiththesametaxonomicgranularity.Thisisnotnecessarilyalways the case. One data source might refer to households; the other, to individuals, or two data sources could refer to street-level addresses and postal code areas, respectively. In many cases, it would still make sense to match records that do not strictly refer to the same entity, but rather refer to entities with some defined taxonomic closeness. We leave this out of the definition for simplicity, as it does not affect our analysis of the surveyed methods. Somewhat ironically, as often pointed out, entity matching itself suffers from the problem of being referenced by many different names, some referring to the exact same problem, while others are slight variations, specializations, or generalizations. In addition, the names are not used completely consistently. Table1 lists a selection of these names. We will comment on af e w . Entity resolution, record linkage,a n ddata matchingare frequently used for more or less the same problem as we defined above. It is not unusual thatA and B are assumed to have the same schema—eitherbecausetheschemasare,infact,equal,orbecausesomekindofschemamatching has already been performed as a separate step. Sometimes, fusing the matching pairs to one rep- resentation is considered a final step of the problem. If we also have duplicates within each data source,itmightbenecessarytoclusterandfusemorethantworecordsatatime.Inthisarticle,we will stick to the more narrow definition laid out above.Deduplication or duplicate detectionis the problem of identifying which records in the same data source refer to the same entity, and can be seen as the special caseA = B. String matchingattempts to find strings that refer to the same en- tityandcanberegardedasthespecialcase n =m = 1,ifstringsareinterpretedassingle-attribute records. 1An entity does not have to be a physical object, but can also be abstract or conceptual, e.g., a company or an event. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 6 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:5 2.2 Neural Networks and Deep Learning Weprovideabriefandsimplifieddescriptionofneuralnetworksanddeeplearning,followedbya shortintroductiontohowdeeplearningisusedinnaturallanguageprocessing.Acomprehensive introductiontothesetopicsisoutsidethescopeofthissurvey.Seeinstead,forexample,Goodfellow etal.[ 31],fromwhichwewilladaptsomeofournotationinthefollowingparagraphs,forageneral introduction to deep learning, and Goldberg [30] and Jurafsky and Martin [45] for introductions to deep learning for natural language processing. Aneuralnetwork isamachinelearningmodel.Wewishtoapproximatesomeunknownfunction f∗(x) =ythat can map from some interesting inputx to some desired outputy. Usually, we will have some examplesD ={(x(j) ,y(j))|1≤j≤m}, which are known to be such thatf∗(x(j))≈y(j) forall j,tohelpguideus.Toapproximate f∗,wedefineafunction f (x;θ) parameterizedby θ,and then try to learn whatθshould be using the examplesD. This functionf is the neural network. Even though there are no strict requirements for what constitutes a neural network, they usually follow a common recipe. Generally, we letf consist of one or more nested functions f (x) = fL(fL−1(... f1(x))).Eachsuchfunction fl wouldnormallybealinearoperation,likematrix multiplication,usingtheparameters θandthennestedbyanonlinearelement-wiseoperation.For example, fl(x) = max(0,Wx +b),whereboth W andb arepartof θandmaxiselement-wise.We call these nested functionslayers,a n dL is thedepth of the network. When a neural network has several layers (no clear threshold), we call it a deep neural network. Given a suitable network architecturef, we try to find parametersθthat will make it behave closetotheexamples D.Wefirstdefinealossfunction L(y, ˆy)quantifyinghowwrongaprediction ˆy= f (x;θ) iscomparedtothecorrect y.Thenwerandomlyinitialize θandperformsomevariant or descendant of stochastic gradient descent with mini batches: θt +1 =θt−α1 | ˜D| ∑ (x ,y)∈˜D ∇θtL(y,f (x;θ)) , whereαis the learning rate, and˜D⊂D is a random mini-batch. The stoppingcriterion and other details vary between methods. This procedure is expensive, because it needs to evaluatef and differentiateL with respect toθ.T om a k ei te ffi c i e n t ,w em a k es u r et oc h oo s e| ˜D|≪| D| and also differentiate with the backpropagation algorithm. Generally, we can interpretf as a directional acyclic computational graph. The backpropagation algorithm simply applies dynamic program- ming using the chain rule over this computational graph. The real strength of deep learning is its ability to do hierarchical representation learning. With modern techniques, multilayered networks are able to learn useful features from relatively un- structured input data [55]. This is especially valuable for data such as images and text, which are notoriously hard to extract good features from with manually crafted procedures. 2.2.1 Deep Learning for Natural Language Processing.Many state-of-the-art methods for natu- rallanguageprocessingaredeeplearningmodels[e.g., 21,96,106].Centraltoallthesemethodsis howtextistransformedtoanumericalformatsuitableforaneuralnetwork.Thisisdonethrough embeddings,whicharetranslationsfromtextualunitstoavectorspace—traditionallyavailablein alookuptable.Thetextualunitswillusuallybecharactersorwords.Anembeddingslookuptable can be seen as parameters to the network and be learned together with the rest of the network end-to-end. That way the network is able to learn good distributed character or word represen- tations for the task at hand. The words used in a dataset are often not unique to that dataset, but rather just typical words from some language. Therefore, one can often get a head start by us- ing pretrained word embeddings like word2vec [63], GloVe [75]o rf a s t T e x t[9], which have been ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 7 =====
52:6 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla trained on enormous general corpora. Following a rather recent trend, large pretrained networks that can produce contextualized word embeddings that take into account the surrounding words are also available [21,76,79]. Text is naturally interpreted as a sequence. It is therefore perhaps not so surprising that neural networks designed for sequences are often used. One way to model sequences is to use Convo- lutional Neural Networks (CNNs)—first popularized by computer vision applications—which has receivedconsiderableattentionwithinthenaturallanguageprocessingcommunity[ 18,47].How- ever, a more prominent sequence model has been Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [26]a n d their variants. RNNs are constructed by repeating the same layer multiple times. Each layer takes both the output from the previous layer as well as some part of an input sequence. So assuming theinputtobeasequence x1,..., xL,wenestlayersrecursivelyas hl = fl(hl −1,xl;θ),where hl is calledthehiddenstate.Layerssharethesameparameters,andthenumberoflayerscantherefore be dynamically adjusted to the length of the input sequence. The last hidden state will, in theory, containinformationaboutthewholeinputsequence.Additionallayerscanbeappendedtofurther process this feature vector and produce some desired output. Output sequences can be generated in a number of ways by setting the initial hidden state and then extracting the hidden state from different layers. RNNs themselves consist of a (dynamic) number of layers, but it is also possible to nest several RNNs. We then get what is called stacked RNNs. RNNsarerelativelydeepnetworksandarethereforepronetowhatiscalledvanishinggradients. The gradients from the early layers become so small that they are ineffective in gradient descent. In other words, the first parts of the input sequence have too little influence over the end result. Therefore, variants of RNNs such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [39] and Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) [14] are often used in practice. They make sure that hidden states are more easily abletoflowthroughthesubsequentlayersundisturbed,sothatgradientswillremainstrongwhen backpropagatedthroughmanylayers.Despitethisimprovement,thenetworkswillstilltendtobe influencedmorebytheendoftheinputsequencethenthebeginning.Ithasbecomequitecommon tohavebidirectionalRNNs[ 35,86],whichcanbeseenascombiningtwoRNNs,whereoneofthem processes the input sequence backward. Another popular way to face the issue of skew in influence for sequences is to use attention mechanisms [5]. The idea is to let the network itself choose what parts of the input to focus on, potentially for several iterations. This is typically achieved in a network by producing some nor- malized attention vector that is multiplied with the vector of interest. WhileinitiallyusedasanenhancementtoRNNs,networksbasedalmostsolelyonattention[ 96] have recently started to proliferate [21, 79, 106] and are currently considered state-of-the-art for many,ifnotmost,naturallanguageprocessingtasks.Wecallthesetransformer-basednetworks— asoriginallynamedby[ 96]thattargetedmachinetranslation.IncontrasttoRNN-basednetworks, they are not sequential with respect to the input sequence. See Figure1 for an illustration of an RNN and transformer encoder. This makes them more parallel, which again makes it easier to leveragemodern,highlyparallelhardware.Inaddition,oneavoidsprohibitivedeepnetworks(due tovanishinggradients)forlonginputsequences.Eachlayerperformsself-attentionoverthewhole input sequence, effectively removing the long paths between cells of RNNs that makes it so hard to learn long-range dependencies. Since transformer networks are architecturally agnostic to the input sequence order, they are instead fed positional information through the input as positional embeddings. One particular influential recent trend has been the ability to leverage huge pretrained models thathavebeentrainedunsupervisedforlanguagemodelingonmassivetextcorpora[ 21,76,79]— similartowhatthecomputervisioncommunityhasdoneforawhile.Theyproducecontextualized wordembeddingsthattakeintoaccountthesurroundingwords.Theembeddingscanbeusedasa ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 8 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:7 Fig. 1. Illustration of the architecture for a two-stack uni-directional RNN encoder and a three-layer BERT- style [21]encoder fornatural language processing. Let(x1,x2,..., xl ,..., xL) be the input sequence, andel beanembeddingfor xl.BothastandardRNNandLSTMblockareillustratedfortheRNNarchitecture.No- ticetheadditional contextstateCl forLSTM,whichcanmoreeasilycarrygradients.Inspiredbyillustrations in [21,71, 96]. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 9 =====
52:8 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla much more powerful variant of the classical word embeddings, but as popularized by BERT [21], one can also fine-tune the network to the task at hand. Take BERT as an example. It is pretrained jointly on masked language modeling and next sentence prediction. Input during training is a special [CLS] token first, then the two sentences terminated by a special [SEP] token each. The [CLS] tokens output from the network is used to do the next sentence classification. Each token’s embeddingisaugmentedwithapositionalembeddingandasegmentembeddingindicatingwhich sentence it belongs to. This setup makes the network suitable for fine-tuning on both sequence labeling tasks as well as pair labeling tasks (such as question answering or entity matching). 3 RELATED WORK 3.1 Other Surveys and Extensive Overviews Given entity matching’s long history, there is no surprise that it has been surveyed before in various ways, covering entity matching as a whole and more narrow aspects. First, there are several books that provide an overview. Christen [15] is a dedicated and com- prehensive source on entity matching, Naumann and Herschel [66] specifically cover the slightly more specialized problem of duplicate detection, and Batini and Scannapieco [6], Doan et al. [23], Talburt [93] all introduce entity matching in the context of data quality and integration. Second, the workshop tutorials by Getoor and Machanavajjhala [29], Stefanidis et al. [90] serve as intro- ductory summaries. Third, Elmagarmid et al. [25] present a literature analysis. Other sources cover more narrow aspects of entity matching—such as specific techniques or subtasks.Quiteearlyon,statisticiansdominatedthefieldofentitymatching.Probabilisticmethods w e r ed e v e l o p e db yN e w c o m b ee ta l .[67] and given a solid theoretical framework by Fellegi and Sunter [27]. These probabilistic methods are summarized by Herzog et al. [38] and Winkler [102, 103]. Blocking, which is surveyed by Christen [16] and Papadakis et al. [72, 73], is considered an important subtask of entity matching, meant to tackle the quadratic complexity of potential matches. Christophides et al. [17] specifically review entity matching techniques in the context of big data. There has been an uptick in interest in both machine learning and crowdsourcing as a solution to entity matching in recent years. As part of a larger survey on crowdsourced data management,Lietal.[ 57]covercrowdsourcedentitymatching.Luetal.[ 62]summarizetheuseof machinelearning,whileGurajadaetal.[ 36]presentanoverviewofcrowdsourcing,activelearning, and deep learning for entity matching. While earlier works mention or cover neural networks for entity matching to various degrees, we are to the best of our knowledge the first to present a dedicated, complete, and up-to-date survey. 3.2 Related Problems Entity matching can be seen as part of a larger group of tasks with roots in natural language processing that solve similar, but distinct, matching problems. Interestingly, but perhaps not sur- prisingly, deep learning-based methods have become state-of-the-art in all these tasks. We will briefly mention some of the most prominent ones. — Coreference resolution:Given a text, find all mentions of entities and determine which mentionscorefer.Twoentitiesmentioncoreferiftheyrefertothesameentity[ 44].Incon- trast, entity matching is concerned with more structured data with clearly distinct units of data (records). Importantly, entity matching does not have to take into account a larger textual context, which is necessary in coreference resolution to find coreferring mentions across multiple sentences. State-of-the-art methods are able to perform the whole task ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 10 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:9 end-to-end using a deep network without detecting and disambiguating mentions in two separate steps [43,56]. — Entity alignment:Given two knowledge bases, find which entries across the two that refer to the same entity. Knowledge bases, in contrast to record sets in entity matching, have relations between entries. Leveraging these relations are central to the task. The way mostneural-basedmethodsdothisisbyproducingso-calledknowledgegraphembeddings [13,91,113],embeddingsofentrieswhichincorporateinformationabouttheirrelationship to other entries. As a slightly specialized variant, user identity linkage is the problem of identifying which users across two social networks are the same [112]. — Entity linking:Given a text, find all mentions of entities and link them to entries in a knowledge base. One example of a heavily used knowledge base would be Wikipedia. In someways,onecanseeentitylinkingasahybridbetweencoreferenceresolutionandentity alignment,anditdiffersfromentitymatchinginthesameways.Neural-basedmethodsare considered state-of-the-art [49,81]. — Paraphrase identification: Given two texts, determine if they are semantically equivalent—i.e., if they carry the same meaning. This can be be seen as a generalization of string matching, if one interprets strings referring to the same entity as implicating that the strings are also semantically similar. Nonetheless, we still consider figuring out which texts convey the same meaning in general to be a distinct problem from entity matching. First,entitymatchingdealswithmorestructureddata.Secondandmostimportantly,inen- tity matching, all records refer to an entity, and we are only concerned with which specific real-world entity a record is referring to. Any excess meaning carried by a record does not impact matching. Finally, there is also semantic textual similarity and textual entailment, which are closely related to paraphrase identification. Semantic textual similarity is concerned with the de- gree of how semantically similar two texts are, while textual entailment is about finding out whether one text semantically entails, contradicts, or is neutral to a second text. Addi- tionally, in the case of multiple choice, question answering can also be seen as a matching problem. State-of-the-art for most of these matching problems rely on rather generic, but powerful, language understanding models [21,106]. Inabroadersense,similarproblemsarealsostudiedinthecontextofinformationretrieval[ 64]. Neural networks not only provide effective techniques for retrieving unstructured text but also fordataformatsthathavetraditionallybeenlessaccessiblesuchasimages[ 61]—andevenacross modals [105]. 4 THE ENTITY MATCHING PROCESS Traditionally, entity matching is often thought of as a process consisting of multiple steps, even though there is no generally agreed upon list of specific steps. It is useful to compare methods in light of how they relate to this abstract process. To this end, we introduce a high-level reference modeldescribingtheentitymatchingprocessasfivedistinctsteps.Thesestepscanalsobeviewed asachainofthesubtasksorsubproblemsthatmakeupentitymatching.Inspiredbyprocessesand figures such as those in [15,17,24,36,66], Figure2depicts this reference model of the traditional entitymatchingprocess.Wewillusethemodeltoframethediscussionofdifferentmethodsusing neural networks. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 11 =====
52:10 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla Fig.2. Illustrationofthereferencemodelforatraditionalentitymatchingprocessanditsfivesteps.Human- in-the-loop aspects are not considered. The process adheres to the problem definition introduced above. It assumes two data sources as input. In theory, it could be generalized to multiple sources, but this is seldom done in the literature. A single source, as previously mentioned, can simply be seen as a special case. At the end of the process, the result is simply matches. Since this is an abstract process extracted from theliterature,itisnotnecessarilyfollowedstepbystep.Theordermightnotbecompletelystrict, and steps might be intermingled or skipped—as will be clear when we look at specific methods. We also note that this process is machine-oriented and does not highlight any iterative human interactions or feedback loops. Significant research has gone into both crowdsourcing [33, 97, 98, 100]andactivelearning[ 4,46,78].Interestingly,Kasaietal.[ 46]useadeepneuralnetworkintheir active learning approach. Such human-in-the-loop factors are often crucial for entity matching in practice [22]. We do not consider our proposed process to be in conflict with these aspects, but rather mostly orthogonal. Empirically, based on the surveyed methods, we do not find neural networks to be very tightly coupled to any human-in-the-loop techniques. We therefore focus on the machine-oriented aspects. 4.0.1 DataPreprocessing. Thefirststepintheprocessisdatapreprocessing,whichisusuallya crucial step in many data integration tasks [23]. The goal is to get both data sources into consis- tentandsimilarformatsbettersuitedfordownstreamtasks.Typicaltransformationsmayinvolve removing excess punctuation, lowercasing all letters, normalizing values, and tokenizing. Some- times, one might also view this step as feature extraction, where records are transformed to a feature space. Preprocessing is, of course, very dependent on the domain and the specific data sources. 4.0.2 Schema Matching. After preprocessing, we perform schema matching, where the objec- tive is to find out which attributes should be compared to one another, essentially identifying semantically related attributes. This will enable downstream steps to compare records across the two sources. Even though schema matching is often considered a separate problem to be solved before performing entity matching [e.g.,15], we choose to include it both because deep learning- based methods have the potential to perform it jointly with other steps (as a surveyed method shows[68])andbecauseitisfrequentlyanunavoidableprobleminreal-worldusecasesforentity matching. Inpractice,thisstepisoftenperformedmanuallyaspartofthepreprocessingstep,simplymak- ing sure to transform both data sources into the same schema format. Traditional techniques for schema matching span a wide range of solutions. They can use both schema metadata and actual attribute values. Some are supervised learning methods, while others are unsupervised. Impor- tantly,mostofthemarecompletelyindependentofdownstreamtasksintheprocess,thoughmost techniques are actually not developed specifically for the purpose of entity matching. For more ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 12 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:11 in-depth coverage of schema matching, see Bellahsene et al. [7], Doan et al. [23], Rahm and Bern- stein [80]. 4.0.3 Blocking. Since the number of potential matches grows quadratically, it is common to pick out candidate pairsC⊆A×B in a separate step before any records are compared directly. We call this stepblocking, and the goal is to bring down the number of potential matches|C|≪ |A×B|toalevelwhererecord-to-recordcomparisonisfeasible.Notethatintheliterature,blocking is sometimes used as a name for only one of the possible strategies for avoiding the quadratic complexity [e.g.,17]. For simplicity, we refer to any effort to make record comparison feasible as blocking. Onecanthinkoftheblockingstepasdoingimplicitcomparisonofrecords,whilethecomparison stepdescribedbelowisdoingexplicitcomparisonbetweenpairsofrecords.Thereisoftennoway around performing at least some explicit pairwise comparison, since implicit comparison cannot offer the necessary precision. In certain cases, when the comparison lends itself to indexing, it is possible to fuse record pair comparison and blocking into one step. Usually, however, the explicit comparison is nontrivial, infeasible, or impossible to speed up by indexing—necessitating a need to prune away obvious nonmatches in a separate blocking step. This is possible because implicit comparisonwilltypicallyhavelowerprecision,butcanbedonemoreefficiently.Atthesametime, explicitcomparisonwilltypicallyhavehigherprecisionbuthasinherentquadraticcomplexity.By constructing a high-recall implicit comparison step to filter away obvious nonmatches first, we can make it feasible to use a more powerful high-precision explicit comparison afterward. Typicaltechniquesarebasedonhashing,sorting,orvariouswaysofindexing.Someworkcom- pletely independent from the downstream steps, while others are more coupled with the record pair comparison and classification steps. For example, if matches are decided based on thresholds of string similarity measures, it is often possible to specifically index attribute values to prune awayaccordingtothatcriteria[ 108].Mosttechniquesrelyheavilyonsyntacticsimilarity,includ- ingthosebasedonsupervisedmachinelearning.SeeChristen[ 16]andChristophidesetal.[ 17]for extensive reviews on blocking techniques. In practice, it is not uncommon that blocking involves quite a bit of manual feature selection, picking out which attributes should be used and which technique to apply. 4.0.4 Record Pair Comparison. When the number of candidate pairs|C| has been reduced to a manageable amount, we can compare individual records(a,b)∈C. The pairwise comparison results in a similarity vectorS, consisting of one or more numerical values indicating how similar or dissimilar the two records are. Traditionally,suchcomparisonshavemostlybeenmadeusingstringsimilaritymeasures.These measures typically quantify a very specific syntactic similarity, and therefore differ in what clues formatchingstringstheyareabletopickup.Someare,forexample,goodatadjustingforspelling errors or Optical Character Recognition (OCR) errors. String similarity measures have been ex- tensively covered before [15, 25, 62]. It is possible to incorporate domain knowledge in a string similarity measure to also perform semantic comparison instead of just syntactic [3, 88], but it is lesscommonandintroducestheextrachallengeofacquiringsuchmaterializeddomainknowledge. String similarity measures are made to compare two strings and cannot be directly applied to a pair of records. Normally, one will compare those attributes which were found to be semantically similarintheschemamatchingstep,therebygettingmultiplemeasurementstoincludein S.Also, sincethesimilaritymeasuresarealmostalwaysstaticandonlycoveranarrowsyntacticsimilarity, one can use multiple measures and offload the job of figuring out which ones to emphasize to the downstream classification step. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 13 =====
52:12 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla 4.0.5 Classification. Lastly, the objective of the classification step is to classify each candidate pair as either match or nonmatch based on the similarity vector. In cases where|S| = 1, simple thresholding might be enough, while when|S| > 1, one needs more elaborate solutions. Early efforts in entity matching were focused on unsupervised probabilistic methods for do- ing classification. Initially developed by Newcombe et al. [67] and later formalized by Fellegi and Sunter [27], the idea is that, given certain assumptions, one can calculate the optimal matching choice according to some bounds on false positives and negatives. It can be seen as very close to a naive Bayes classifier, classifying record pairs as either match, nonmatch, or uncertain—where the uncertain matches must go through manual review. The motivation is that common attribute values that agree (for example, a very common first name) are less significant than rare attribute values that agree. See Herzog et al. [38] for a complete introduction to probabilistic approaches. Recently, methods based on rules or machine learning have been more prominent. Rules are predicates over the similarity vectorS that flag them as match or nonmatch. They can be con- structed manually, making them a powerful and highly explainable way of explicitly incorporat- ingdomainknowledgeintotheclassification.Manuallyconstructingrulesrequiresalotofexpert labor, so significant work has been put into automatically learning rules from examples. Other efforts in leveraging learning have used off-the-shelf classification models such as decision trees and support vector machines. These machine learning models are then trained on examples ofS for which it is known if they represent a matching or nonmatching record pair. Both rule-based and machine learning approaches are covered extensively in the literature [15,23,25]. 4.0.6 Outline. Table2lists,tothebestofourknowledge,allmethodsthatuseneuralnetworks for entity matching and which steps of the process they tackle using neural networks. We will in the subsequent subsections take a closer look at each step and see how different methods use neural networks to handle them. 4.1 Data Preprocessing Deepneuralnetworksaregoodatdoingrepresentationlearning.Aswewillsee,theycantherefore effectively learn to do some of the data preprocessing we would traditionally do manually. When we explore how the different methods do this, we will focus on two aspects: how embeddings are usedtogetrecordsinasuitableinputformat,andhowthenetworks’hierarchicalrepresentations are structured. 4.1.1 Embeddings. Neuralnetworksaloneonlyworkwithnumericaldata,soanimportanten- ablingfactorinlettingnetworkslearnrepresentationsishowtextualrecordsaretransformedinto anumericalformat.Inpractice,thisisdoneusingembeddings,asexplainedinSection 2.Notethat while some embedding models, like GloVe [75], are not neural networks, we still consider them a crucialcomponentforneuralnetworksandhowtheyareabletoreplacemanualfeatureextraction (see Section5). They perform and enable powerful representation learning on text. Other embed- dingmodels,likeword2vec,canbeseenasasimpleneuralnetwork.Eventhoughtheembeddings are later used in a lookup table, they were trained using this simple network. One interesting use of word2vec is that of Nozaki et al. [70]. They do not use the word embeddings as input to a neu- ral network, but use them as is in a simple aggregation and comparison scheme to do schema matching (details in Section4.2.3). Granularity. Embeddings can be used at different granularities, usually at word or character level. The second column of Table3 shows which methods use which granularity. Word embed- dings significantly reduce the length of the sequences to be processed compared to character em- beddings but come at the expense of increasing the number of unique values that have to be ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 14 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:13 Table 2. Overview of Which Steps of the Entity Matching Process Reference Model Different Methods Tackle with Neural Networks Method Data Schema Blocking Record pair Classificationpreprocessing matching comparison SEMINT [58, 59] • SMDD [107] • Nin and Torra [69] • ∼ Pixton and Giraud-Carrier [77] • Wilson [101] • Tran et al. [95] • NNSM [109] • Gottapu et al. [32] • • Reyes-Galaviz et al. [83] • Kooli et al. [51] • • • DeepMatcher [65] • • • Wolcott et al. [104] • • DeepER [24] • • • ∼ MPM [28] • • • Kasai et al. [46] • • • Seq2SeqMatcher [68] • • • • Nozaki et al. [70] • • AutoBlock [110] • • Hi-EM [111] • • • Brunner and Stockinger [11] • • • • Ditto [60] • • • • Table 3. Overview of How the Surveyed Methods Use Embeddings, Specifically at What Granularity, if They Use Pretrained Embeddings, and Whether They Fine-tune Embeddings Method Embedding granularity Pretrained embeddings Fine-tuned embeddings Gottapu et al. [32]W o r d N o - Kooli et al. [51] Word & Character N-gram Yes No DeepMatcher [65] Word & Character N-gram + Yes+ No Wolcott et al. [104] Character No - DeepER [24]W o r d Y e s Y e s + MPM [28] Word & Character N-gram Yes No Kasai et al. [46] Word & Character N-gram Yes No Seq2SeqMatcher [68] Word & Character N-gram Both ∗ No Nozaki et al. [70] Word Yes No AutoBlock [110] Word & Character N-gram Yes No Hi-EM [111] Character No - Brunner and Stockinger [11] Character N-gram Yes Yes Ditto [60] Character N-gram Yes Yes Surveyed methods not using embeddings at all are left out.+Other options were tried, but this was found to be most preferential.∗The method uses pretrained embeddings for the attribute value text, but standard embeddings trained from scratch for attribute labels. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 15 =====
52:14 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla represented by many orders of magnitude. This often makes solutions relying on word embed- dings more vulnerable to out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words, i.e., words that were not present in the training data. Word-based embedding models usually handle unknown words by assigning the same embedding to all unknown words, making no distinction between them. When embeddings are pretrained on large general corpora (as will be discussed next), but the data sources at hand containdomain-specificwordsthatareotherwiserare,theywillnaturallytendtobelessuseful.In addition,thedatasourcesathandmighthavelowdataqualityandcontaintyposorsmallspelling variations that are not common in the training data—thus effectively making those words OOV. Motivatedbytheseconcerns,themajorityofthemethodsusefastText[ 9]embeddings(orsimilarly, Wordpiece/SentencePiece/Byte-Pair-Encoding[53,86,87]forthetransformernetworks).FastText combines embeddings for both the word itself and all character N-grams of certain lengths, often making it possible to find a suitable representation for an OOV word, since the word most likely hasknownN-grams.UsingN-gramsinthiswayisbasicallyawayofapproximatelyincorporating a morpheme granularity level to word-level embeddings [9]. Doesthechoiceofembeddingsmatter?Mudgaletal.[ 65]comparefastTextto(thepurelyword- based) GloVe and find fastText to have an edge when the data sources contain domain-specific wordsthatareOOVandotherwisecomparable.Ebraheemetal.[ 24],meanwhile,comparefastText without N-grams, GloVe, and word2vec [63], reaching the conclusion that there is no significant difference.Thecombinedresultsmightindicatethattheembeddinggranularityismoreimportant than which particular embedding is used. Pretraining. One of the benefits of popular word embeddings models like word2vec, GloVe, and fastText is that you can get pretrained embeddings. They have been trained on enormous general corpora, have vocabularies of significant size, and are often available for different lan- guages. Pretrained character embeddings are not nearly as common, though Zhao and He [111] are, in essence, pretraining the entity matching model on large amounts of training data and can in a way be thought of having pretrained character embeddings. The third column in Table3 shows which methods use pretrained embeddings. Using pretrained embeddings is essentially a way of doing transfer learning for feature extraction. Since embeddings can be trained unsuper- vised, there is generally a substantial amount of training data available. This can be very helpful if it manages to reduce the necessary amount of labeled training data for the downstream entity matching task at hand. Mudgal et al. [65] found that learning embeddings from scratch instead of using pretrained embeddings can be favorable to highly specialized data sources, while for other data sources, pretrained embeddings either outperformed or were comparable to learning from scratch. Fine-tuning.Evenwhenembeddingshavebeenpretrainedonsomelargetextcollection,onestill hastheopportunitytocontinueadjustingthemwhendoingthetask-specifictrainingtogetherwith all other weights. We refer to this asfine-tuning the embeddings—the opposite offreezing them. The fourth column in Table3shows which methods fine-tune their embeddings, which currently is only Ebraheem et al. [24]. They found fine-tuning to help on hard datasets—i.e., those that are very challenging or impossible to get close to perfectF1 score on. 4.1.2 RepresentationLevels. Embeddingsofferneuralnetworksaninitialmappingfromtheac- tual input to a suitable numeric representation. But as mentioned earlier, the strength of deep learning’s use of neural networks is really its ability to do hierarchical representation learning, whichisachievedusingmultiplelayers,learningincreasinglyabstractfeatures[ 55].Thefirstlay- ers of deep networks will typically be designed to enable building a good representation of the input, and then let the last layers focus on producing the desired output. It is nontrivial to figure ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 16 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:15 Table 4. Overview of Which Explicit Representation Levels the Surveyed Methods Make Use of and Which Kinds of Network Layers are Used to Build Representation from the Level Below Method Character Word Attribute Record Gottapu et al. [32] Standard embeddings 1 Convolutional Wolcott et al. [104] Standard embeddings 1 BiLSTM, 2 FC DeepER [24]G l o V e + 1 BiLSTM+ MPM [28] ∗ fastText∗∗ Kasai et al. [46] fastText 1 BiGRU Nozaki et al. [70] word2vec Sum, average AutoBlock [110] fastText 1 BiLSTM+, self-attentation Weighted sum DeepMatcher [65] fastText + Cross-attention, 1 BiGRU+ Seq2SeqMatcher [68] Standard embeddings & fastText Cross-attention Hi-EM [111] Standard embeddings 1 BiGRU, cross-attention, self-attention 1 BiGRU, cross-attention, self-attention Concatenation Brunner and Stockinger [11] Byte-pair encoding+, 12 transformer layers (self- and cross-attention)+ Ditto [60] Byte-pair encoding+, 12 transformer layers (self- and cross-attention)+ Methods in upper half use independent record representations, and those in the bottom half use interdependent record representations. Self-attention is any attention mechanism that only uses elements within the same record, while cross- attentionreferstoanyattentionmechanismlookingacrosstworecords. +Otheroptionswereexplored,buttherepresen- tational power was similar or lower.∗Multiple options in use at the same time. out what each layer actually learns. When we compare the surveyed methods, we instead focus on explicit levels of representation. Table4highlights how each method does representation learning by listing which explicit rep- resentation levels are used, and which techniques are used to build representation from the level below, where the explicit level units are character, word, attribute, and record. It is important to note that the table does not reflect the entire neural network of each method, but rather only the beginning layers that are to be considered as the feature extraction part of the network. We con- sider a representation level as used if you can simply pick out a vector representation for units of thatlevelaftersomelayer.Avectorisconsideredtorepresentaunitifitscalculationsonlyrelyon that unit or other input through an attention mechanism. Importantly, a vector that relies on two records through something else than an attention mechanism is not considered a representation, but rather a comparison (see Section4.4). Figure3 illustrates the difference in terms of computa- tionalgraphs.Ofcourse,withneuralnetworks,theactuallinebetweentheinitialfeatureextraction ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 17 =====
52:16 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla Independent representations Interdependent representations Comparison Fig. 3. Illustration of what is considered a vector representation (independent or interdependent) and what isconsideredacomparisonintermsofcomputationalgraphs.Here, a andb arerecordsand αisanattention mechanism. part and the rest is an artificial one and not necessarily indicative of how the networks actually learnandwork.Buttheydoreflectdesigndecisionstoacertaindegreeandhelpuscomparethem in that regard. Weseeeachmethod’sfirstlayeris(unsurprisingly)anembedding,providinginitialcharacteror word vectors. Some use a specific embedding model, like fastText, while others just use standard lookup table embeddings that they train themselves. Next, we note the popularity of RNN-based modelsamongthemethods,whichisinlinewiththewidespreaduseofsuchsequence-awaremod- elsinnaturallanguageprocessing[e.g., 34,54,92].AninterestingcaseisthatofMulti-Perspective Matching(MPM)[ 28],whichactuallycombinestwoversionsofDeepMatcher[ 65]aswellasclas- sical similarity measures in its architecture. Themethodscanbenaturallydividedintotwocategorieswhenitcomestorepresentationlearn- ing: independent or interdependent representation. If the highest representation level relies on a recordpairinsteadofasinglerecord,wesayitisaninterdependentrepresentation.Otherwise,itis anindependentrepresentation.SeeagainFigure 3foranillustration.ThemethodsinTable 4have independent and interdependent representation at the top and bottom, respectively. Interdepen- dent representationsare,in essence,a wayto incorporaterecordpaircomparisoninto thefeature extraction. They have the benefit of being able to adapt based on what they will be compared to, whileindependentrepresentationshavethebenefitofnotrelyingonrecordpairstobecomputed. The latter will be important when we discuss blocking in Section4.3. Independent representation. There is significant variation among the methods with independent representation. Kooli et al. [51] and Nozaki et al. [70] mostly rely on word embeddings for the feature extraction part of the network. Kooli et al. simply concatenate them before the next lay- ers do comparison, and Nozaki et al. aggregate them through summation and averaging. Wolcott et al. [104] use bidirectional LSTM on character embeddings followed by dense layers to produce record-level representations. As the only method, Wolcott et al. actually go straight from charac- ters to record representation. Kasai et al. [46] use bidirectional GRU on word embeddings to get an attribute-level representation. As the only surveyed method, Gottapu et al. [32] apply a simple convolutionallayertowordembeddings.Lastly,bothDeepER[ 24]andAutoBlock[ 110]havenet- works solely aimed at finding good representations for use in blocking (see Section4.3). DeepER usesbidirectionalLSTMonwordembeddingstogetarecord-levelrepresentation(butalsoshowa simpleaveragingapproachiscompetitive).Somewhatdifferently,AutoBlockappliesbidirectional LSTM and self-attention on word embeddings to get an attribute representation and represents records as a weighted sum of attributes. Interdependent representation. DeepMatcher [65] explores several ways of building attribute representation from word embeddings. The one with the highest representational power, ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 18 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:17 Hybrid, uses a combination of bidirectional GRU and decomposable attention [74] across records. Unique among the surveyed methods, Seq2SeqMatcher [68] structures records as sequences of (attribute, word) pairs. The embedding of such a pair is a concatenation of a custom embed- dingfortheattributeandafastTextembeddingfortheworditself.Therecord-levelrepresentation is produced through an attention technique between the sequences of two records. Brunner and Stockinger [11] treat a record pair as a sequence of attribute value sub-word tokens, while Ditto [60]modelrecordpairasasequenceofalternatingattributenameandvaluesub-wordtokens.Both let each token keep its own representation throughout the representation building layers. These transformer networks take interdependent representation to an extreme, as each token depends onallotherineverytransformerlayer.Finally,Hi-EM[ 111]istheonlymethodwhichusesallthe four explicit representation levels. It applies a combination of bidirectional LSTM, self-attention within the record, and attention across records—both from its standard character embeddings to wordvectorsandfromitswordvectorstoitsattributevectors.Fortherecord-levelrepresentation, it simply concatenate the attribute vectors. 4.2 Schema Matching Giventwodatasources AandB,wedividethewaysinwhichtheschemascanberelatedinthree: — Aligned schemas: Both data sources use the same schema. In other words, ∀i∈{1,2,... , n}(Ai = Bi) andn =m. — Misaligned schemas:Both data sources have the same attributes, but not in the same order.Inotherwords,thereexistsabijectiverelation H⊂{Ai}n i=1×{ Bj}m j=1 suchthat∀AiBj : ((Ai ,Bj)∈H)→(Ai = Bj). — Incompatible schemas:There is no simple correspondence. In other words, there does not exist such a bijective relation as described above. With aligned schemas, there is no need for schema matching. For misaligned schemas, finding a one-to-onecorrespondencebetweenattributesissufficient,whileinthegeneralcaseofincompat- ible schemas, more complex connections must be uncovered. Many schema matching techniques are concerned with the former case, misaligned schemas. For entity matching, the goal is usually to find out which attributes should be compared in the downstream task where records are com- pared;wewanttofindthepairs (Ai ,Bj)ofattributesthataresemanticallyrelated.Sooneattribute canbecomparedtoseveralattributesfromtheotherdatasource—implyingincompatibleschemas. Anadditionalchallengethatmightoccurisdirtyattributevalues—valuesthatshouldhavebeen inanotherattribute[ 65,68].Insuchcases,weneedtocompareattributesthatmightnotnecessarily be semantically related in order to be robust to noise. There are two sources of information when doing schema matching. There are the actual at- tributevaluesinrecords,andthereistheattributemetadata.Attributemetadatawilloftensimply be a name (e.g.,title and author). When it comes to neural networks for schema matching, there are essentially four approaches in the surveyed methods: 4.2.1 Learn Attribute Matching from Clusters.SEMINT [58,59], SMDD [107], and NNSM [109] specificallytargetschemamatching.Theyallfirstcreatetrainingdatabyperformingunsupervised clusteringofattributes,andthenusethatdatatotrainamultilayeredperceptron 2 (MLP).SEMINT uses a Self-Organizing Map [48] to cluster the feature vectors of attributes in data sourceA into categories. The attribute features are handcrafted and are based on both schema metadata and 2An MLP is a simple feedforward network using only fully connected layers. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 19 =====
52:18 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla attribute values. The category clusters are then used as labeled data to train an MLP with one hidden layer. Given an attribute feature vector, the network scores its similarity to these cluster categories, and this is used to match the attributes of data sourceB to the categories ofA.S M D D followsasimilarstrategy,butusesthedistributionofattributevaluesandahierarchicalclustering technique. Somewhat differently, NNSM clusters pairs of attributes into either being similar or dissimilar based on similarity scores of four traditional matchers. Next, they train an MLP with two hidden layers to classify a pair of attributes as either similar or dissimilar using the clusters as training data. Aninterestingaspectoftheseschemamatchingmethodsistheirlackofneedforhuman-labeled training data. The methods that learn from clusters generate training data by using more tradi- tional unsupervised manual methods. As Zhang et al. [109] explains it, they are essentially using neural networks as a way to combine several traditional methods. 4.2.2 LearnSchemaMapping. NinandTorra[ 69]translaterecordsfromsource Atorecordsfol- lowingtheschemaof B.Theytrainanetworkforeachattributein B,whichcantranslatearecord a∈Atoarecordof B’sschema.Workingonlyonpurelynumericdata,theyareabletosimplyuse records fromA as input and output values as the translated record from a neural network. The networkeffectivelytransformsincompatibleschemasintoalignedschemas.Thisapproachcanre- solve the schema matching problem for downstream tasks but also does a lot of the heavy lifting of the record pair comparison by attempting to project records fromA to corresponding records inB. 4.2.3 Compare Attribute Representations. Nozaki et al. [70] do schema matching by threshold- ingthecosinedistancebetweenattributevectors.Theattributevectorsarefoundbyfirstsumming up the pretrained word embeddings for each attribute in each record and then simply averaging perattributeacrossallrecords.Eventhoughitreliesonpretrainedwordembeddings,themethod itself is unsupervised. The distance threshold was simply found experimentally. 4.2.4 Learn Jointly with Comparison and Classification.While schema matching has tradition- ally been dealt with as a separate task, as with the methods above, Nie et al. [68], Brunner and Stockinger [11], and Li et al. [60] incorporate it as part of their deep learning approach for com- paring and classifying record pairs. As explained in the previous subsection, Seq2SeqMatcher [68] structure records as sequences of (attribute, word) tokens, and then solve entity matching as a sequence matching problem. The embedding of such a token is a concatenation of a custom embedding for the attribute and a fastText embedding for the word itself. Notice that no attribute metadata is used. Treating the input in this way enables the neural network to learn how to compare values across attributes. Specifically,theauthorsuseabidirectionalattentionmechanismbetweentokenembeddingsfrom two records, and then use only the maxk attention scores to get the soft-attended representation of a token. Using only thek largest attention scores, effectively setting the rest to zero, helps the model compare only relevant tokens and ignore irrelevant tokens. Brunner and Stockinger [11] preserve no information about the attributes other than the order (which,ofcourse,maydifferacrossschemas),andsimplytreatarecordasasequenceofsub-word tokens. They rely entirely on the powerful attention mechanism in the transformer network to do the schema matching using positional information provided through the input and whatever insightandcorrelationtheattributevaluesprovide.Ditto[ 60],ontheotherhand,explicitlyincor- porate attribute name sub-word tokens in the input sequence, which gives more information to theTransformernetworktoperformschemamatching.IncontrasttoSeq2SeqMatcher,Dittouses ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 20 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:19 the attribute name instead of a randomly initialized embedding—enabling the network to exploit knowledge from its language modeling pretraining that the attribute name might signal. 4.3 Blocking Few methods try to use neural networks for blocking, as seen in Table2. The only two methods, DeepER [24] and AutoBlock [110], embed records into a high-dimensional metric space and then do nearest neighbor search to filter down the cartesian productA×B to a candidate pair setC. Theybothusecosinedistanceasametric,andthenetworksareimplicitlytrainedtoproducerecord representationsclosetoeachotherformatchingrecordsandfarfromeachotherfornonmatching records. Finding the nearest neighbors in high-dimensional spaces is computationally infeasible, so to make it more feasible, they perform approximate nearest neighbor search. Then there is no guaranteeto find thenearestneighbors,but rathera high probability.Both methodsdo this using locality sensitive hashing (LSH) [40], which is a well-studied technique [99]. Thetwomethodsfollowthesamehigh-levelstrategy,buttheyhavesomeimportantdifferences. Thenetworksthemselvesthatareresponsibleforbuildingagoodrecordrepresentationarediffer- entiated in Section4.1. DeepER trains its network end-to-end with comparison and classification of record pairs. The record representations are compared using either elementwise subtraction or multiplication, and then a dense layer performs the classification. AutoBlock, in comparison, trains specifically for blocking with a custom loss applied directly to the cosine distance between records. For the actual nearest neighbor pruning, they use two different LSH methods. DeepER uses hyperplane LSH [12, 42], a well-studied method that is known to be easy to implement and often fast in practice. AutoBlock uses cross-polytope LSH [2], which has the benefit of theoreti- callyoptimalqueryrunningtimewhilealsobeingefficientinpractice.Bothusemultiprobingwith distance 1. 4.4 Record Pair Comparison Centraltomatchingistoassessthesimilarityoftworecords,bothsyntacticallyandsemantically. The surveyed neural networks will generally produce some distributed representation at either attribute- or record-level and then compare the representations. We consider the layers in a net- work that are responsible for reducing from representations per record to representations across records appropriate for classification as record pair comparison layers. Or, to put it simply, those layers producing the similarity vectorS from per-record representations. We will look at three central characteristics of how comparison is performed: 4.4.1 Attribute-aligned Comparison. If one assumes the two data sourcesA and B to have aligned schemas, one can compare attributes in a one-to-one fashion. We then say the compar- ison is attribute-aligned. The alternative is to perform comparison at record level, as one will be less dependent on the schemas to be aligned. The second column in Table5 shows which of the surveyed methods do attribute-aligned comparison. DeepMatcher [65] and Kasai et al. [46]b o t h compare attributes one-to-one before they combine the similarity representation to record level. Tohandlecaseswherenon-attribute-alignedcomparisonisnecessarybecausethedataisdirtyand arepartiallyputinwrongattributes,DeepMatchermergesallattributestoonelongstringattribute –essentiallyreducingtheproblemtoastringmatchingproblem.Thisis,ofcourse,somethingmost attribute-alignedmethodscandotoovercomethisrestriction,butthentheinformationcarriedby the attribute separation is lost. Hi-EM [111] does actually not align the comparison of attribute representations, but the attribute representations have been produced by implicitly comparing characters and words through an attention mechanism across aligned attributes. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 21 =====
52:20 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla Table 5. Overview of How the Surveyed Methods Perform Record Pair Comparison Method Attribute-aligned Distributed similarity Attention-based Kooli et al. [51] No Yes No DeepMatcher [65]Y e s Y e s + Words+ Wolcott et al. [104]N oN o N o DeepER [24]N o ∗ Yes No MPM [28] Yes Both (Partially) words Kasai et al. [46]Y e s Y e s N o Seq2SeqMatcher [68]N o Y e s W o r d s Hi-EM [111] Yes Yes Characters, words Brunner and Stockinger [11] No Yes Character N-grams Ditto [60] No Yes Character N-grams +Otheroptionsweretried,butthiswasfoundtobepreferential. ∗Themostexpressivemodel(BiLSTM-based)doesnon- attribute-aligned comparison, while the simpler averaging model is attribute-aligned. 4.4.2 Distributed Similarity. When two distributed representations are compared, one can ei- ther produce another distributed representation for the similarity of them or reduce the repre- sentations down to a nondistributed similarity representation—usually a scalar. The third column in Table5 shows which of the surveyed methods make distributed similarity representations. As can be seen, the majority of the surveyed methods do. Typical ways of computing these similari- tiesincludevectordifference,Hadamardproduct,orconcatenation.Theonlywithnondistributed similarities, Wolcott et al. [104], use cosine distance to compute the similarity. Nondistributed similarities have the benefit of reducing complexity and training time, but at the cost of expressiveness. The increased expressive power of distributed similarities has to be matched by a classifier able to use it. Mudgal et al. [65] reported that distributed similarities out- perform nondistributed. In addition, they found vector difference to be significantly better than concatenation when used after representation layers that do not use cross-attention. MPM [28] stands out since it combines both distributed and nondistributed similarity. It uses multiple clas- sical similarity measures and two versions of DeepMatcher [65] in parallel and let the network effectively choose a similarity representation through a softmax. 4.4.3 Cross-record Attention. As we saw in Section4.1.2, some methods build distributed rep- resentations that are dependent on the record to be compared to through attention mechanisms. They are essentially peeking at what is to come, which enables them to focus on what is im- portant for the comparison. The fourth column in Table5 summarizes which methods use cross- attention and at which representation levels. DeepMatcher [65] uses attention between words across records, while Hi-EM [111] uses attention between both character- and word-level repre- sentationsacrossrecords.Bothrestricttheirattentionmechanismwithineachattribute,sincethe comparison is attribute-aligned. In contrast, Seq2SeqMatcher [68], Brunner and Stockinger [11], andDitto[ 60],areabletouseattentionbetweenallsub-words/wordsacrossthecomparedrecords. The Transformer networks take cross-attention all the way by relying almost exclusively on at- tention throughout the architecture and not making any distinction between self-attention and cross-attention. 4.5 Classification Comparedtotheothersteps,thereislessvarianceinhowthesurveyedmethodsperformclassifi- cation.Generally,theytakeinasimilarityvector S anddobinaryclassification.Deemingarecord pair matching or not. As an exception to this approach, Gottapu et al. [32] classify recordsa∈A ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 22 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:21 Table 6. Overview of Which Neural Network Layers the Surveyed Methods Use for Classification Method Classification layers Pixton and Giraud-Carrier [77] Two linear layers with custom sparsity pattern, threshold on ratio of match and mismatch score Wilson [101] Single perceptron, threshold Tran et al. [95] MLP, softmax Gottapu et al. [32] Linear layer, softmax Reyes-Galaviz et al. [83] Two-layered MLP with custom sparsity pattern, threshold Kooli et al. [51] MLP, LSTM, or CNN DeepMatcher [65] Two-layered MLP with Highway-connections [ 89], softmax DeepER [24] Single dense layer ∗ MPM [28] Two-layered MLP with Highway-connections [ 89], softmax Kasai et al. [46] Two-layered MLP with Highway-connections [ 89], softmax Seq2SeqMatcher [68] Two-layered MLP, softmax Hi-EM [111] Single dense layer Brunner and Stockinger [11] Single dense layer, softmax Ditto [60] Single dense layer, softmax ∗The authors emphasize that any machine learning classifier can be used and do not explicitly favorize a neural network. directly to a corresponding recordb∈B, treating matching the problem as a multiclass classifica- tion with|B| classes. S can be from a separate procedure, like string similarity measures, or upstream layers in the same neural network. The first was more common in earlier methods, while the former is com- mon among newer deep learning methods. Nonetheless, the actual networks or layers used for classification are relatively similar. Table6 shows how each method’s classification network is built—either standalone or as the final layers of a larger network. We see that most are variations of the same theme of MLP with softmax at the end. 5 CONTRIBUTIONS FROM DEEP LEARNING In the previous section, we dissected the use of neural networks in all the surveyed methods us- ing our process reference model. We now take a step back and summarize which contributions deep learning provide entity matching. Initially when neural networks were applied for entity matching, they were used merely as a classifier over feature vectors, either for schema matching or determining if pair of records matched or not. In the past few years, following the rise of deep learning, we have seen not only an increase in the use of neural networks, but also a broadening of the role they play in the entity matching process. 5.1 Learned Feature Extraction and Comparison Traditionally, as part of the preprocessing in entity matching, it is common to transform the data through a range of handcrafted procedures to a format more suitable for comparison. Important features are made more prominent and accessible to the steps downstream, while less important featuresarefilteredaway.Examplesincludephoneticencoding,removingpunctuation,stemming, and expanding common domain-specific abbreviations. The problem is that these procedures are highlydependentonthedatasources,andanexperthastodecidewhichfeaturesareessentialand how to extract them. Such customization makes it harder to scale a solution across data sources and use cases. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 23 =====
52:22 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla In contrast, driven by the advances of deep learning for natural language processing, more re- centmethodsareabletolearnfeatureextractionfromlesspreprocessedrecords.Asmentionedin Section 4.1.1, embeddings are used as a powerful gateway to letting neural networks work with text, while hierarchical representation learning and sequence models make it possible to make semantically rich distributed representations of attribute values and records. This alleviates the need for much of the ad-hoc handcrafted feature extraction procedures, leaving mostly standard- ized feature extraction steps such as simple tokenization. This is in line with the development in other domains using deep learning, where deep neural networks have been increasingly able to replace complex handtuned feature engineering [55]. Of course, it does not replace all forms of preprocessing when data sources in different formats and of different origins are to be matched. One might, for example, need to extract records from some nonstandard XML or JSON format. While current deep learning methods do not remove the need for such handcrafted ad-hoc pre- processing, feature extraction can still be a very labor-intensive part of the preprocessing, and so deep learning has the potential to lighten the manual load drastically. In addition to feature extraction, a point of significant handcrafted complexity is that of string similarity measures. Traditionally, one would use several string similarity measures between two records to produce a similarity feature vector and then use a neural network, some other classi- fication model, or rules to classify the pair as matching or nonmatching based on this similarity vector. Doing comparison together with feature extraction in a deep neural network, we are able to effectively learn how to do comparison of records. The network will learn to extract features that are suitable for comparing records, either for static comparison or for downstream layers in the network. In cases where cross-attention is used, the network is even able to learn to extract features tailored to be suitable for comparison against a specific record. Compared to traditional approaches, learning comparison in this way can remove the need for these complex handcrafted similaritymeasures.Also, sincedeep networkscanproducepowerfuldistributedrepresentations, this approach opens up a straightforward way to perform semantic comparison. This means one can depend less on syntactic similarity, which is hard to do with handcrafted methods. Transfer learning has been a catalyst to being able to train more powerful deep learning mod- els with fewer labeled examples for the task at hand in both natural language processing [84] and computer vision (where starting out with large networks [e.g.,37] pretrained on enormous datasets like ImageNet [20] is common). Deep learning methods for entity matching have also started to use such opportunities. Using some of the readily available pretrained word embed- dings is popular, and is used as an efficient way of transfer learning from large general corpora. Thirumuruganathan et al. [94] outline different ways to transfer learn between entity matching task using weigted sums of word embeddings as distributed record representations. Some meth- odsalsousetransferlearningbeyondwordembeddingsandpretrainmodelsspecificallyforentity matching[46,111].Furthermore,mostrecently,wehavealsoseentheuseoflarge,powerful,gen- eral pretrained language models that are fine-tuned to entity matching [11, 60]. Compare this to traditionalmethods,whichdonottypicallyincorporatetransferlearning.Whileonecanarguethat this is to be expected, since deep learning methods will usually require more training examples, the use of deep networks makes it possible to realize very powerful transfer learning scenarios, which are hard to pull off with traditional methods. 5.2 Coalescing the Entity Matching Process In Section4, we introduced the reference model of the traditional entity matching process. To supportourdiscussion,weintroduceareferencemodelforadeeplearning-basedentitymatching process. Figure4 depicts this reference model together with the traditional variant while high- lighting how steps correspond between them. One should note that none of the surveyed deep ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 24 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:23 Fig.4. Illustrationofthereferencemodelforadeeplearningentitymatchingprocess(bottom)togetherwith the reference model for the traditional entity matching process (top) and how they relate to each other. learning methods actually follow this exact process. It is the essence of all the methods summed up in one view. What all surveyed deep learning methods have in common is that they have fused together feature extraction, record pair comparison, and classification in a single step as a neural network. Theneedfordataprocessingasaseparatestepstillexists,butwithlessfocusonfeatureextraction. In some ways, this development comes naturally. The steps are carried out in more or less the same order, and one can (to a certain degree) distinguish between them in the neural network architecture.ButaswesawinSection 4,somemethodshavealsoexploredusingneuralnetworks for schema matching and blocking. Nie et al. [68] is the first deep learning method to incorporate schema matching in an end-to- end fashion together with record pair comparison and classification. They essentially construct the feature extraction and record pair comparison part of the network in such a manner that it is possibletolearnschemamatching—reducingthesteptoabuilt-inpropertyofthenetwork—inef- fect,jointlytrainingamodelforbothmatchingschemasandrecords.Comparedtosolvingschema matching as a separate task upfront, this has the potential benefit of being able to adapt how the schemas are matched to how they are used downstream. Other deep learning methods assume the schema to be the same for both data sources, but to what degree and how this assumption is manifested in the method differ (see Section6). The surveyed methods tackling blocking with deep learning [24, 110] rely on making a dis- tributed representation of a record with a neural network, and then finding the candidate pairs with approximate nearest neighbor search. In other words, the network produces indexable fea- turevectors,andthroughtheuseofasuitableindex,wefindsimilarrecordsinsubquadratictime. While it does not remove the blocking step, it does reduce the core blocking mechanism to an in- dexingproblemoversomestandardmetric.Thenetworkwilllearnhowtodoblockingbylearning howtorepresentsimilarrecordsclosetoeachotherinthemetricspace,whilethenearestneighbor ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 25 =====
52:24 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla searchwill always remain thesame. Ifone uses thesame distributedrepresentationsdownstream forrecordpaircomparison,italsoservesasagoodwaytoalignhowblockingandrecordpaircom- parisonevaluatesimilarity.Itisnotunusualintraditionalmethodsthatthesetwosteps,whoboth attheircoredorecordcomparison,havetwoconsiderablydifferentwaysofmeasuringsimilarity. In computer vision and natural language processing, one has traditionally operated on large, complex, and heavily engineered pipelines. They are often divided into distinct steps that have been worked on separately. In contrast, deep learning methods in these fields have evolved to do what previously was done in several distinct steps in one go with a deep network [e.g.,82, 92], making it possible to train on tasks end-to-end. In a similar fashion, we can see deep learning increasingly reshaping the entity matching process by coalescing traditional steps. This has at least two immediate benefits. First, it effectively reduces the number of steps in the process, and second,itmakesitpossibletotrainanincreasingpartoftheprocessend-to-end.Themainenabling factor is the representation learning in modern deep learning techniques for natural language processing, which is able to tie all of these together. As we have seen, powerful feature extraction can remove much of the need for manual feature engineering in schema matching, blocking, and record pair comparison. When in addition these steps are able to share the feature extraction and become part of an end-to-end network covering a large portion of the entity matching process, it can be translated to a potentially great reduction in complexity when building entity matching pipelines.Becausethecomplexityoftheprocessliesnotonlyintheindividualsteps,butalsointhe interactionbetweenthem.Tuningandgettingmultipleheavilyengineeredstepstoworksmoothly together can be difficult. 6 TAXONOMY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS FOR ENTITY MATCHING We have seen how neural networks serve different purposes in the entity matching process and vary in how they do so. Deep learning has led to an increase in the use of neural networks for entitymatchinginthepastfewyears,makingdeepnetworksthenorm.Allofthesedeeplearning methodshave in common thattheyreducetheneedfor tedioushandcraftingoffeatures,buthow thenetworksarestructuredatahighleveldiffersinimportantways,whichimpacttheirabilityto interactwithotherstepsintheentitymatchingprocess.Theschemamatchingandblockingsteps areespeciallyinterestinginthisregard,sincetheyhavetraditionallybeensolvedwithspecialized methodsseparatefromrecordpaircomparisonandclassification.Withthisinmind,weproposea taxonomy of deep neural networks for entity matching consisting of four categories. There is no concretedefinitionofwhatconstitutesa deepneuralnetwork,soforthepurposeofthistaxonomy we only consider networks that do feature extraction3 (basically those who are marked for the datapreprocessingstepinTable 2).Thecategoriesaredecidedbytwobinarypropertiesthatwere introducedinSection 4:(1)whethercomparisonisattribute-alignedornot,and(2)whetherrepre- sentations usedfor comparison are independentor interdependent.Figure5shows the taxonomy and which category each surveyed deep neural network falls into. In addition, it highlights how schema matching and blocking are related to the categories and which of the methods leverage their neural networks to tackle these steps. The two properties do not only reflect the high-level structuralpropertiesofthenetwork,butalsotheassumptionsoftheproblemtobesolved.Tohelp illustrate the taxonomy, we also show one representative deep learning network architecture for each category in Figure6. 3Note we also exclude Nozaki et al. [70], since the method do not represent a neural network itself. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 26 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:25 Blocking Schema matching Fig.5. Taxonomyofdeepneuralnetworksforentitymatching.Splitintofourcategoriesalongtwoaxesthat represent two binary properties. Methods within the blue and red colored areas are methods that address blocking and schema matching, respectively. 6.1 Attribute-aligned or Non-attribute-aligned Comparison Ifthenetworkisstructuredinawaythatassumesrecordsfromthetwodatasourcestohavealigned schemas and constrain record comparison to one-to-one on attributes, we say it has attribute- aligned comparison. If it does not, we say it has non-attribute-aligned comparison. Notice that comparisondoesnotnecessarilyneedtobeexplicitrecordpaircomparison,butcanalsobeimplicit comparison through, for example, indexing of distributed representations. Attribute-alignedcomparisonisapowerfulwaytoincorporatepriorknowledgeintoamethod, potentiallymakingtrainingeasierandmoreefficient.Atthesametime,itpreventsthepossibility ofperformingschemamatching.Non-attribute-alignedcomparisondoesnotnecessarilyimplythe methodisbeingusedforschemamatching,butthatitisinitsnaturemorecompatibleandshould be easier to adapt to performing it. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 27 =====
52:26 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla (a) Rigid encoder - Kasai et al. [46] (b) Flexible encoder - DeepER [24] (c) Aribute comparator - DeepMatcher [65] (d) Record comparator - Dio [60] Fig. 6. High-level illustration of four deep learning architectures—one for each category in the taxonomy. Note that the input is assumed to have already been replaced with its embedding. 6.2 Independent or Interdependent Representation Ifthenetworkreliesonseeingapairofrecordsthataretobecomparedtoproducerepresentations oftherecords,wesayitgeneratesinterdependentrepresentations.Otherwise,wesayitgenerates independent representations. Interdependent representations have the benefit of being able to observe what they are being compared to. Intuitively, it is easier to compare two things if we can look at both at the same time. If we are only allowed to look at one thing at a time, then it is harder to know what to focus on. On the other side, by being dependent on seeing the record to be compared to produce ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 28 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:27 a representation, one has essentially made it impossible to compare a large number of records in anysubquadraticway.Forindependentrepresentations,itispossibletogeneratearepresentation of each record once and implicitly compare them through a form of indexing, effectively opening up the possibility of doing blocking with the representations made from the network. 6.3 The Four Categories — Rigidencoders arenetworksthatproduceindependentattributerepresentationsandthen perform comparison. Even though none of the surveyed methods do, it is possible to use such independent attribute representations for blocking purposes. — Flexibleencoders arenetworksthatproduceindependentrecordrepresentationsandthen perform comparison. It is possible to perform blocking using these independent represen- tations, as shown by DeepER [24] and AutoBlock [110]. If the representations can be built fromrecordswithtwodifferentschemas,onecanalsoeffectivelyperformschemamatching, but none of the current methods do. — Attribute comparatorsare networks that use cross-attention only within the same at- tribute. They are inherently focused on doing aligned attribute-to-attribute comparison. DeepMatcher [65] has attribute-to-attribute comparison explicitly designed into the net- work architecture. Hi-EM [111] takes it a step further by training individual networks per attribute. There is no easy way to perform blocking or schema matching with such a net- work architecture. — Record comparatorsare networks that use cross-attention at record level without be- ing constrained by the boundaries of attributes. They can learn how to compare across attributes, making it possible to overcome misaligned schemas and even incompatible schemas,dependingonthenetworkstructure.Seq2SeqMatcher[ 68]wasthefirstofthesur- veyedmethodinthiscategory,anditisabletohandleincompatibleschemas.Transformer- basednetworks,whichcannaturallyworkasrecordcomparators,havelatershowntopro- vide state-of-the-art performance [11,60]. 7 EVALUATION 7.1 Metrics An entity matching system can be evaluated in several ways. Since it is fundamentally a very skewedbinaryclassificationproblemwithfewpositivescomparedtonegatives,itisnaturaltouse precision/recallmeasures—popularmetricsfrominformationretrievalandmachinelearningclas- sification. And while precision and recall (as well as accuracy) are sometimes reported, the most prominent is to report and evaluate the matches using theF1 measure. Of course, while simple, this metric only measures one aspect of an entity matching system. Different authors have there- fore used additional metrics. Kasai et al. [46] focus on the important issue of how many training examplesamodelneeds,andmeasure F1 fordifferentamountsofprovidedtrainingexamples.Fo- cused on scalability, Wolcott et al. [104] report wall-clock running time for different sizes of the data sources. Itisalsopossibletoevaluateintermediatestepsinisolationinadditiontotheend-to-endresult. Some methods specifically target blocking, and so specifically measure the outcome of that step. One could evaluate blocking the same way as the end result, usingF1. But remember that for blocking we are mainly interesting in getting high recall, and less interesting in precision as long as the number of candidate pairs|C| is sufficiently lower than the size of the Cartesian product |A×B|.Sothesurveyedmethodsreportbothrecallandsomevariantofreductionratiofromdata ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 29 =====
52:28 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla Table 7. Overview of Public Datasets that Have Been Used by at Least Two of the Surveyed Publications Dataset Domain # Records # Attributes # Matches # Pos/ # Candidates Abt-Buy [19,52] Product 1,081–1,092 3 1,096 1,028/9,575 Amazon-Google [19,52] Software 1,363–3,226 3 1,300 1,167/11,460 Beer [19] Beer 3,274–4,345 4 68/450 DBLP-ACM [19,52] Citation 2,616–2,294 4 2,224 2,220/12,363 DBLP-Scholar [19,52] Citation 2,616–64,263 4 5,347 5,347/28,707 Fodors-Zagats [1,19] Restaurant 533–331 6 112 110/946 iTunes-Amazon [19] Music 4,875–5,619 8 132/539 Walmart-Amazon [19] Electronics 2,554–22,074 5 1,154 962/10,242 # Records lists the number of records in each data source, # Matches denotes the number of matches between them, and #Pos/#Candidatesdenotesthenumberofpositiveexamplesamongalltherecordpaircandidatesinanagreed-uponsubset of the potential matches. The latter is used when blocking is not part of the experiment. sources to candidate set. Ebraheem et al. [24]r e p o r tRR = |C| |A×B|, while Zhang et al. [110]r e p o r t P/E =|C| |A|. 7.2 Datasets The early approaches to entity matching were mostly concerned with matching personal records (census data or medical records). Such datasets are usually not publicly available due to privacy concerns.Today,methodsareevaluatedondatafromdifferentdomains.Asubstantialofamountof reported results are from closed datasets, but we’re seeing increasingly more open datasets being used. Some of the most popular open datasets include domains such as publications, restaurants, products,songs,andcompanies[ 1,19,52].SeeTable 7foranoverviewofthemostpopularpublic datasets among the surveyed methods. In order to test certain scenarios, some authors also artifi- cially construct new datasets based on existing ones, either by reducing the data quality [e.g.,65] or constructing new records [e.g.,41]. 7.3 Experimental Results 7.3.1 Comparing Surveyed Methods. It has historically been hard to directly compare reported experimental results. Either because they do not target and measure the same aspect of the en- tity matching process, do not use the same data, or do not evaluate in the same way. For ex- ample, several methods have been evaluated on some of the same datasets but used completely different train-test splits (both the actual selection and train-test ratio). There is a general lack of widespread and agreed upon benchmarks that would make comparison across many methods straightforward—likewehaveseenincorecomputervisionandnaturallanguageprocessingtasks. To a large degree, one has relied on authors to reimplement and run other methods within their ownevaluationsetup.Soforthemajorityofthesurveyedmethods,wecannotmakeanycompar- ison using reported experimental data. It is, however, possible to partially compare some of the more recent methods. Figure7 shows whichsurveyedmethodsthathaveexperimentalresultsthatletyoucompareittoothermethods. Mainly due to the adaptation of some of the experiments done by Mudgal et al. [65]a sab e n c h - mark, but also due to authors of a method running new experiments on earlier methods in their evaluationsetup.TheMudgaletal.[ 65]benchmarkletuscompare(atleastpartially)severalmeth- ods at once. Table8 presents an overview of all available experimental results on those specific benchmark experiments. We observe that the transformer-based networks, especially Ditto [60], seems to be the current state-of-the-art. Ditto does use some domain-specific optimizations, but ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 30 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:29 Mudgal et al. [65] benchmark Fig. 7. Overview of which of the surveyed methods have been compared experimentally to each other and which have at least partially been subject to the same benchmarks. Arrows indicate that the method at the head was compared to the method at the tail in the latter’s publication. Note that they are not necessarily transitive, and they do not all test the same task (i.e., some compare blocking, others only matching after blocking). The blue area is methods that have been tested on at least a subset of the public benchmark from Mudgal et al. [65].∗A sp o i n t e do u tb yL ie ta l .[60], the authors do model selection using the test set—effectively leaking from the test set and making the results slightly unfit for comparison with others. Table 8. Overview of Reported Results from the Surveyed Methods on the Public Part of the Benchmark from Mudgal et al. [65] Dataset MG [ 50]D M + [65]D e e p E R†[24] MPM [28] Kasai [46]S 2 S M [68]B & S∗[11] Ditto [60] Structured Amazon-Google 49.1 69.3 56.08 70.7 75.58 Beer 78.8 72.7 50.00 94.37 DBLP-ACM 98.4 98.4 97.63 98.45 98.9 98.99 DBLP-Scholar 92.3 94.7 90.82 92.94 95.3 95.60 Fodors-Zagats 100.0 100 97.67 100.0 iTunes-Amazon 91.2 88.0 72.46 97.06 Walmart-Amazon 71.9 66.9 50.62 73.6 78.2 86.76 Dirty DBLP-ACM 91.9 98.1 89.62 98.4 98.9 99.03 DBLP-Scholar 82.5 93.8 86.07 94.1 95.6 95.75 iTunes-Amazon 46.8 74.5 67.80 94.2 95.65 Walmart-Amazon 37.4 46.0 36.44 68.3 85.5 85.69 Textual Abt-Buy 43.6 62.8 42.99 90.9 89.33 We have also included reported results [65] from Magellan (MG) as a state-of-the-art classical non-neural method. All experiments use the post-blocking record pair candidates described in Table7.T h estructured versions are the unaltered datasets where attributes are aligned, while in thedirty variant other attributes are moved to thetitle attribute with a 50% probability. For thetextual dataset, Abt-Buy, all attributes are long textual descriptions.+We only report the Hybrid model, which is generally considered the strongest.†The results from Ebraheem et al. [24] are not comparable to the others due to different setup, so reproduced results from [60] are used instead. Note that those results do not involve the blocking method from [24].∗Not entirely fit for comparison since the authors do model selection using the test set. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 31 =====
52:30 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla theauthorsreportstrongresultsforabaselinewithoutthoseoptimizations.Notethatthisbench- markonlyaddressescertainaspectsoftheentitymatchingprocess.Comparableresultsforaspects such as training time, prediction latency, and label efficiency cannot be collected in the same way for several methods—even though some results and comparison between pairs of surveyed meth- ods have been reported. And neural methods addressing blocking, using active learning, or using transfer learning are not in a state where any significant overview can be provided. 7.3.2 Deep Learning vs. Traditional Methods.Several of the surveyed methods have evaluated deep learning approaches against more traditional approaches [11,24,28,46,51,65,68,104,110]. The results are generally promising for deep learning approaches, but traditional methods are often competitive. Most methods compare themselves to Magellan [50], which is considered a state-of-the-art traditional entity matching system, usingF1 scores. Mudgal et al. [65]r e p o r t that DeepMatcher mostly outperforms Magellan with a few exceptions (see parts of the result in Table8). The relative strength of DeepMatcher to the traditional method increases as the data quality decreases, and the same is reported about Seq2SeqMatcher [68]. AutoBlock [110]i sf o u n d tobeespeciallystrongagainsttraditionalblockingtechniquesfordirtydata.Thismaysuggestthat deeplearningapproaches’strengthismostclearlyseenwhenthedataisnoisyandheterogeneous. Kasaietal.[ 46]investigatetheuseoftransferlearningandactivelearningfortheirdeeplearning model.TheyfindMagellantosignificantlyoutperformtheirmodelwhengivenfewlabeledtraining examples,buttheywereabletomakeitsubstantiallymorecompetitiveusingtransferlearningand activelearning.Themodelstillperformsfavorablyincomparisontothetraditionalmethodswhen given enough examples. 8 FUTURE RESEARCH InSection 5,wesawwhichcontributionsdeeplearninghavemadetoentitymatching.Wewillnow take a lookat boththechallenges andopportunitiesfor deepneuralnetworksin entitymatching, both of which represent potential directions for future research. 8.1 Challenges 8.1.1 Explainability and Ease of Debugging.Entity matching, being a central data integration task,isconstructingdatamodelsthatareconsumedbypeopleormachinesfordownstreamtasks. For many applications, it is crucial to trust the data source, and being able to understand why something does not work is key. Unfortunately, deep learning models are notoriously hard to in- terpret.Asstepsintheentitymatchingprocessincreasinglycoalesceintoalargeneuralnetwork, asillustratedinFigure 4,wegetfewercheckpointsalongthewayintheprocessthatcaneasilybe inspected.Wecannotseetheoutputfromeachstepinthesamewayanymore.Therefore,figuring out why two records where matched or not matched is usually nontrivial. There are a few tech- niques that are already used, such as looking at alignment scores, but we are still far away from a comprehensive way of debugging neural networks for entity matching. 8.1.2 RunningTimeinInteractiveSettings. Humaninteractionisconsideredanimportantfactor in entity matching [22]. Users cannot generally be expected to wait for very long when they are supposed to do interactive work, limiting the potential applications of deep learning for entity matching in interactive settings, since the running time for both training and prediction is high— especially compared to cleverly engineered traditional pipelines with good blocking. 8.1.3 NumberofTrainingExamples. Asmorestepsintheentitymatchingprocessareaddressed bydeeplearning-basedtechniques,themoredifferentstepsrelyonmoretrainingdata.Deeplearn- ingmodelsarehungryfortrainingexamples,andthereisnotalwaysanabundanceofthemreadily ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 32 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:31 available.Evenwhiletheuseofdeeplearningcanpotentiallyreducetheneedformanuallaborin theformoffeatureengineering,itmightstillbenecessarytodoexpensivemanuallabeling.While transfer learning and active learning could help, there are not any pretrained entity matching models publicly available to train from. 8.2 Opportunities 8.2.1 End-to-end Approach with Schema Matching and Blocking.As we have seen, deep neural networksareincreasinglyabletotakeoverstepsintheentitymatchingprocess.Butwehavestill notseenamethoddoingbothschemamatchingandblockingtogetherwithrecordpaircomparison and classification in an end-to-end solution with a neural network—in other words, an approach thatimplementsthewholedeeplearningentitymatchingreferencemodelinFigure 4.Thenetwork would presumably be aflexible encoder, belonging in the upper-right corner of our taxonomy. It would have independent representations to make efficient blocking possible and non-attribute- aligned comparison to make schema matching possible. This could be an important step toward tackling the entity matching problem in a streamlined end-to-end fashion. 8.2.2 MoreOpenDatasets. Oneofthefundamentalchallengeswhentryingtodevelopanentity matchingmethodsthatwillworkacrossmanydatasetsisthehugevariationbetweendomainsand data sources. While several open datasets are available, we would like to see significantly more. Itisespeciallyimportanttoincreasethediversityofthedomainsrepresented.Forexample,many datasets are related to either research publications or consumer-focused products/services—there arenoindustrialdatasets.Thiswouldnotonlyenablemorecompleteevaluations,butalsoprovide data suitable for transfer learning. 8.2.3 Standardized Benchmarks. It is not always easy to compare the different methods since they do not necessarily evaluate on the same data in the same way. We have seen how standard opendatasetswithcorrespondingstandardevaluationmetricshavebeenacatalystforadvancesin machine learning for fields such as computer vision [85], recommender systems [8], and natural language processing [10]. We think there is great potential in similar agreed-upon benchmarks for entity matching. This need not only be restricted to traditional precision/recall measures for the resulting matches. It would also be of interest to standardize the evaluation of blocking tech- niques, transfer learning techniques, active learning techniques, and computational performance and efficiency. 8.2.4 PubliclyAvailablePretrainedModels. Whiletherehasbeenworkontransferlearning[ 11, 46,60,111],therearenopretrainedmodelspubliclyavailablespecificallyforentitymatching.Hav- ing pretrained models to fine-tune could potentially speed up training and reduce the amount of necessary training examples. This is challenging, because, as mentioned above, there is a huge variationacrossdomainsanddatasources.Eachdatasourceisdifferent.Buildingpretrainedmod- elsthatcanbefine-tunedforabroadnumberofdatasetsandmakingthempubliclyavailablewould be of huge benefit to the field. This would, of course, benefit from the previous point about more open datasets. An interesting approach for those networks with attribute-aligned comparison, explored by Zhao and He [111], is to have pretrained models for different types of attributes (e.g., name, ad- dresses, and organization) in addition to generic ones. Then one can mix and match models for eachattributeoneisabouttomatch.This,ofcourse,onlyworksforalignedschemas.Itcanbeeven more interesting to look at networks with non-attribute-aligned comparison for such pretrained models, since they can potentially offer pretrained schema matching, which will be crucial to handle the large variety of data source schemas out there. For this, transformer-based networks ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 33 =====
52:32 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla have considerable potential since they are already built on top of heavily pretrained language models. Pretrained models can belong to any of the four categories of our taxonomy. Nonetheless, we find pretrained flexible encoders that can support both blocking and schema matching to be the mostsignificantopportunity.Specifically,becauseitwouldenabletransferlearningjointlyonthe largest possible portion of the entity matching process. 9 CONCLUSION We have seen how existing work has used neural networks in entity matching. By using a refer- encemodelofthetraditionalentitymatchingprocess,wehaveshownhowthesurveyedmethods address different steps of the process and which techniques have been used at each step. More recently, approaches based on deep learning techniques for natural language processing have emerged. We looked at what such deep learning methods contribute to the entity matching task. The central contribution is powerful hierarchical representation learning from text. As we have seen, this can alleviate most of the handcrafted feature engineering necessary in the data preprocessing, which can ease the burden of manually tailored procedures in downstream steps such as record pair comparison. Furthermore, it is a driver in increasingly coalescing steps of the entity matching process into end-to-end neural networks performing several steps in one go, effectively reducing the number of steps and enabling end-to-end training. To give a clear view of how the entity matching process changes with such an increasingly coalesced deep learning approach, we propose a reference model for entity matching processes using deep learning. Todifferentiatethedeepneuralnetworksusedinthesurveyedmethods,weintroducedataxon- omy of deep neural networks for entity matching. It focuses on two propertiesthat are important in regard to how easy it is to support schema matching and blocking. Lastly, we looked at potential directions for future research by discussing challenges and op- portunities.Thechallengesbeingexplainability,runningtimeininteractivesettings,andthelarge need for training examples, while for opportunities we think it would be interesting to develop a complete end-to-end approach with both schema matching and blocking, exploring a new part of the deep neural network taxonomy. We also see a lot of potential in trying to develop more open datasets,standardizedbenchmarks,andpubliclyavailablepretrainedmodelsforentitymatching— which have been important for other fields. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the reviewers for valuable feedback and Carl F. Straumsheim for proofreading. REFERENCES [1] 2003.DuplicateDetection,RecordLinkage,andIdentityUncertainty:Datasets.Retrievedfrom http://www.cs.utexas. edu/users/ml/riddle/data.html. [2] AlexandrAndoni,PiotrIndyk,ThijsLaarhoven,IlyaRazenshteyn,andLudwigSchmidt.2015.Practicalandoptimal LSH for angular distance. InProceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.C .C o r t e s ,N .D . Lawrence, D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett (Eds.). Curran Associates, Inc., 1225–1233. [3] A.Arasu,S.Chaudhuri,andR.Kaushik.2008.Transformation-basedframeworkforrecordmatching.In Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE 24th International Conference on Data Engineering. IEEE, 40–49. [4] Arvind Arasu, Michaela Götz, and Raghav Kaushik. 2010. On active learning of record matching packages. InPro- ceedings of the 2010 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD’10).A C M ,N e wY o r k , NY, 783–794. [5] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. (Sept. 2014). arxiv:cs.CL/1409.0473 [6] Carlo Batini and Monica Scannapieco. 2006.Data Quality: Concepts, Methodologies and Techniques (Data-Centric Systems and Applications). Springer, Berlin. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 34 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:33 [7] Zohra Bellahsene, Angela Bonifati, and Erhard Rahm (Eds.). 2011.Schema Matching and Mapping. Springer, Berlin. [8] J. Bennett and S. Lanning. 2007. The Netflix prize. InProceedings of the KDD Cup Workshop 2007. ACM, New York, 3–6. [9] PiotrBojanowski,EdouardGrave,ArmandJoulin,andTomasMikolov.2016.Enrichingwordvectorswithsubword information. InTransactions of the Association for Computional Linguistics. [10] OndřejBojar,ChristianFedermann,MarkFishel,YvetteGraham,BarryHaddow,PhilippKoehn,andChristofMonz. 2018. Findings of the 2018 conference on machine translation (WMT18). InProceedings of the 3rd Conference on Machine Translation: Shared Task Papers. 272–303. [11] Ursin Brunner and Kurt Stockinger. 2020. Entity matching with transformer architectures-a step forward in data integration. InProceedings of the International Conference on Extending Database Technology. [12] Moses S. Charikar. 2002. Similarity estimation techniques from rounding algorithms. InProceedings of the 34th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC’02). ACM, New York, NY, 380–388. [13] Muhao Chen, Yingtao Tian, Kai-Wei Chang, Steven Skiena, and Carlo Zaniolo. 2018. Co-training embeddings of knowledgegraphsandentitydescriptionsforcross-lingualentityalignment.In Proceedingsofthe27thInternational Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI’18). 3998–4004. [14] Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merriënboer, Dzmitry Bahdanau, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. On the properties of neural machine translation: Encoder–decoder approaches. InProceedings of the 8th Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translation. 103–111. [15] Peter Christen. 2012.Data Matching: Concepts and Techniques for Record Linkage, Entity Resolution, and Duplicate Detection. Springer Science & Business Media. [16] P.Christen.2012.Asurveyofindexingtechniquesforscalablerecordlinkageanddeduplication. IEEETrans.Knowl. Data Eng.24, 9 (Sept. 2012), 1537–1555. [17] VassilisChristophides,VasilisEfthymiou,ThemisPalpanas,GeorgePapadakis,andKostasStefanidis.2019.End-to- end entity resolution for big data: A survey. (May 2019). arxiv:cs.DB/1905.06397 [18] Alexis Conneau, Holger Schwenk, Loïc Barrault, and Yann Lecun. 2016. Very deep convolutional networks for text classification. InEuropean Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL’17). [19] Sanjib Das, A. Doan, C. Gokhale Psgc, P. Konda, Y. Govind, and D. Paulsen. 2016. The magellan data repository. https://sites.google.com/site/anhaidgroup/projects/data. [20] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L. Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. 2009. ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 248–255. [21] JacobDevlin,Ming-WeiChang,KentonLee,andKristinaToutanova.2018.BERT:Pre-trainingofdeepbidirectional transformers for language understanding. (Oct. 2018). arxiv:cs.CL/1810.04805 [22] Anhai Doan, Adel Ardalan, Jeffrey Ballard, Sanjib Das, Yash Govind, Pradap Konda, Han Li, Sidharth Mudgal, Erik Paulson, G. C. Paul Suganthan, and Haojun Zhang. 2017. Human-in-the-loop challenges for entity matching: A midterm report. InProceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Human-In-the-Loop Data Analytics (HILDA’17).A C M ,N e w York, NY, 12:1–12:6. [23] Anhai Doan, Alon Halevy, and Zachary Ives. 2012.Principles of Data Integration(1st ed.). Morgan Kaufmann Pub- lishers Inc., San Francisco, CA. [24] Muhammad Ebraheem, Saravanan Thirumuruganathan, Shafiq Joty, Mourad Ouzzani, and Nan Tang. 2018. Dis- tributed representations of tuples for entity resolution.Proceedings VLDB Endowment11, 11 (Jul. 2018), 1454–1467. [25] A.K.Elmagarmid,P.G.Ipeirotis,andV.S.Verykios. 2007.Duplicaterecord detection:Asurvey. IEEETrans.Knowl. Data Eng.19, 1 (Jan. 2007), 1–16. [26] Jeffrey L. Elman. 1990. Finding structure in time.Cogn. Sci.14, 2 (Mar. 1990), 179–211. [27] IvanP.FellegiandAlanB.Sunter.1969.Atheoryforrecordlinkage. J.Am.Stat.Assoc. 64,328(Dec.1969),1183–1210. [28] ChengFu,XianpeiHan,LeSun,BoChen,WeiZhang,SuhuiWu,andHaoKong.2019.End-to-endmulti-perspective matching for entity resolution. InProceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI’19). AAAI Press, Macao, China, 4961–4967. [29] Lise Getoor and Ashwin Machanavajjhala. 2012. Entity resolution: Theory, practice & open challenges.Proceedings VLDB Endowment5, 12 (Aug. 2012), 2018–2019. [30] YoavGoldberg.2017.Neuralnetworkmethodsfornaturallanguageprocessing. Synth.Lect.Hum.Lang.Technol. 10, 1 (Apr. 2017), 1–309. [31] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. 2016.Deep Learning. MIT Press. [32] Ram Deepak Gottapu, Cihan Dagli, and Bharami Ali. 2016. Entity resolution using convolutional neural network. ProcediaComput.Sci. 95(Jan.2016),153–158. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050916324796. [33] Yash Govind, Erik Paulson, Palaniappan Nagarajan, Paul Suganthan G. C., An Hai Doan, Youngchoon Park, Glenn M. Fung, Devin Conathan, Marshall Carter, and Mingju Sun. 2018. CloudMatcher: A hands-off cloud/crowd service for entity matching.Proceedings VLDB Endowment11, 12 (Aug. 2018), 2042–2045. [34] Alex Graves. 2013. Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks. (Aug. 2013). arxiv:cs.NE/1308.0850 ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 35 =====
52:34 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla [35] Alex Graves, Santiago Fernández, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2005. Bidirectional LSTM networks for improved phoneme classification and recognition. InProceedings of the 15th International Conference on Artificial Neural Net- works. Springer, Berlin, 799–804. [36] Sairam Gurajada, Lucian Popa, Kun Qian, and Prithviraj Sen. 2019. Learning-based methods with human-in-the- loop for entity resolution. InProceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM’19). ACM, New York, NY, 2969–2970. [37] KaimingHe,XiangyuZhang,ShaoqingRen,andJianSun.2015.Deepresiduallearningforimagerecognition.(Dec. 2015). InProceedings of the 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 770–778. [38] Thomas N. Herzog, Fritz J. Scheuren, and William E. Winkler. 2007.Data Quality and Record Linkage Techniques. Springer Science & Business Media. [39] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long short-term memory.Neural Comput.9, 8 (Nov. 1997), 1735– 1780. [40] Piotr Indyk and Rajeev Motwani. 1998. Approximate nearest neighbors. InProceedings of the 13th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing. [41] EkateriniIoannou,NataliyaRassadko,andYannisVelegrakis.2013.Ongeneratingbenchmarkdataforentitymatch- ing. J. Data Semant.2, 1 (Mar. 2013), 37–56. [42] PrateekJain,SudheendraVijayanarasimhan,andKristenGrauman.2010.Hashinghyperplanequeriestonearpoints with applications to large-scale active learning. InProceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. J. D. Lafferty, C. K. I. Williams, J. Shawe-Taylor, R. S. Zemel, and A. Culotta (Eds.). Curran Associates, Inc., 928–936. [43] Mandar Joshi, Omer Levy, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Daniel S. Weld. 2019. BERT for coreference resolution: Baselines and analysis. InProceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP’19). 5803–5808. [44] Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2008.Speech and Language Processing: An Introduction to Speech Recognition, Computational Linguistics and Natural Language Processing. Prentice Hall. [45] Dan Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2020. Speech and Language Processing (3rd ed. draft). Retrieved February 10, 2020 fromhttps://web.stanford.edu/ jurafsky/slp3/. [46] Jungo Kasai, Kun Qian, Sairam Gurajada, Yunyao Li, and Lucian Popa. 2019. Low-resource deep entity resolution with transfer and active learning. InProceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, 5851–5861. [47] Yoon Kim.2014.Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification.InProceedings ofthe 2014 Conferenceon Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP’14). 1746–1751. [48] T. Kohonen. 1987. Adaptive, associative, and self-organizing functions in neural computing.Appl. Opt.26, 23 (Dec. 1987), 4910–4918. [49] Nikolaos Kolitsas, Octavian-Eugen Ganea, and Thomas Hofmann. 2018. End-to-end neural entity linking. InPro- ceedings of the 22nd Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL’18). 519–529. [50] Pradap Konda, Sanjib Das, Paul Suganthan G. C., Anhai Doan, Adel Ardalan, Jeffrey R. Ballard, Han Li, Fatemah Panahi, Haojun Zhang, Jeff Naughton, Shishir Prasad, Ganesh Krishnan, Rohit Deep, and Vijay Raghavendra. 2016. Magellan: Toward building entity matching management systems.Proceedings VLDB Endowment9, 12 (Aug. 2016), 1197–1208. [51] Nihel Kooli, Robin Allesiardo, and Erwan Pigneul. 2018. Deep learning based approach for entity resolution in databases. InIntelligent Information and Database Systems. Springer International Publishing, 3–12. [52] Hanna Köpcke, Andreas Thor, and Erhard Rahm. 2010. Evaluation of entity resolution approaches on real-world match problems.Proceedings VLDB Endowment3, 1–2 (Sept. 2010), 484–493. [53] Taku Kudo and John Richardson. 2018. SentencePiece: A simple and language independent subword tokenizer and detokenizer for neural text processing. InProceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan- guage Processing (EMNLP’18). System Demonstrations, 66–71. [54] Guillaume Lample, Miguel Ballesteros, Sandeep Subramanian, Kazuya Kawakami, and Chris Dyer. 2016. Neural architectures for named entity recognition. InProceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. 260–270. [55] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2015. Deep learning.Nature521, 7553 (May 2015), 436–444. [56] Kenton Lee, Luheng He, Mike Lewis, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2017. End-to-end neural coreference resolution. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP’17). 188–197. [57] G. Li, J. Wang, Y. Zheng, and M. J. Franklin. 2016. Crowdsourced data management: A survey.IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.28, 9 (Sept. 2016), 2296–2319. [58] Wen-Syan Li and Chris Clifton. 1994. Semantic integration in heterogeneous databases using neural networks. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB’94). Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, 1–12. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 36 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:35 [59] Wen-Syan Li and Chris Clifton. 2000. SEMINT: A tool for identifying attribute correspondences in heterogeneous databases using neural networks.Data Knowl. Eng.33, 1 (Apr. 2000), 49–84. [60] Yuliang Li, Jinfeng Li, Yoshihiko Suhara, Anhai Doan, and Wang-Chiew Tan. 2020. Deep entity matching with pre- trained language models.Proceedings VLDB Endowment14, 1 (September 2020), 50–60. [61] Kevin Lin, Huei-Fang Yang, Jen-Hao Hsiao, and Chu-Song Chen. 2015. Deep learning of binary hash codes for fast imageretrieval.In ProceedingsoftheIEEEConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognitionWorkshops .27–35. [62] JiahengLu,ChunbinLin,JinWang,andChenLi.2019.Synergyofdatabasetechniquesandmachinelearningmodels for string similarity search and join. InProceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM’19). ACM, New York, NY, 2975–2976. [63] TomasMikolov,IlyaSutskever,KaiChen,GregS.Corrado,andJeffDean.2013.Distributedrepresentationsofwords and phrases and their compositionality. InProceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.C . J.C.Burges,L.Bottou,M.Welling,Z.Ghahramani,andK.Q.Weinberger(Eds.).CurranAssociates,Inc.,3111–3119. [64] BhaskarMitraandNickCraswell.2017.Neuralmodelsforinformationretrieval.(May2017).arxiv:cs.IR/1705.01509 [65] Sidharth Mudgal, Han Li, Theodoros Rekatsinas, Anhai Doan, Youngchoon Park, Ganesh Krishnan, Rohit Deep, Esteban Arcaute, and Vijay Raghavendra. 2018. Deep learning for entity matching: A design space exploration. In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD’18). ACM, New York, NY, 19–34. [66] FelixNaumannandMelanieHerschel.2010. AnIntroductiontoDuplicateDetection .MorganandClaypoolPublishers. [67] H. B. Newcombe, J. M. Kennedy, S. J. Axford, and A. P. James. 1959. Automatic linkage of vital records.Science130, 3381 (Oct. 1959), 954–959. [68] Hao Nie, Xianpei Han, Ben He, Le Sun, Bo Chen, Wei Zhang, Suhui Wu, and Hao Kong. 2019. Deep sequence-to- sequence entity matching for heterogeneous entity resolution. InProceedings of the 28th ACM International Confer- ence on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM’19). ACM, New York, NY, 629–638. [69] JordiNinandVicençTorra.2006.Newapproachtothere-identificationproblemusingneuralnetworks.In Modeling Decisions for Artificial Intelligence. Springer, Berlin, 251–261. [70] K. Nozaki, T. Hochin, and H. Nomiya. 2019. Semantic schema matching for string attribute with word vectors. In Proceedings of the 2019 6th International Conference on Computational Science/Intelligence and Applied Informatics (CSII’19). 25–30. [71] Christopher Olah. 2015. Understanding LSTM networks. Retrieved from https://colah.github.io/posts/2015-08- Understanding-LSTMs/. [72] George Papadakis, Dimitrios Skoutas, Emmanouil Thanos, and Themis Palpanas. 2019. A survey of blocking and filtering techniques for entity resolution. (May 2019). arxiv:cs.DB/1905.06167 [73] GeorgePapadakis,JonathanSvirsky,AvigdorGal,andThemisPalpanas.2016.Comparativeanalysisofapproximate blocking techniques for entity resolution.Proceedings VLDB Endowment9, 9 (May 2016), 684–695. [74] AnkurParikh,OscarTäckström,DipanjanDas,andJakobUszkoreit.2016.Adecomposableattentionmodelfornat- ural languageinference.In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 2249–2255. [75] JeffreyPennington,RichardSocher,andChristopherManning.2014.Glove:Globalvectorsforwordrepresentation. InProceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP’14).a c l w e b . o r g , 1532–1543. [76] MatthewPeters,MarkNeumann,MohitIyyer,MattGardner,ChristopherClark,KentonLee,andLukeZettlemoyer. 2018.Deepcontextualizedwordrepresentations.In Proceedingsofthe2018ConferenceoftheNorthAmericanChapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers). 2227–2237. [77] Burdette Pixton and Christophe Giraud-Carrier. 2006. Using structured neural networks for record linkage. InPro- ceedings of the 6th Annual Workshop on Technology for Family History and Genealogical Research. [78] Kun Qian, Lucian Popa, and Prithviraj Sen. 2017. Active learning for large-scale entity resolution. InProceedings of the2017ACMonConferenceonInformationandKnowledgeManagement(CIKM’17) .ACM,NewYork,NY,1379–1388. [79] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners.OpenAI Blog1, 8 (2019), 9. [80] Erhard Rahm and Philip A. Bernstein. 2001. A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching.VLDB J.10, 4 (Dec. 2001), 334–350. [81] JonathanRaimanandOlivierRaiman.2018.DeepType:Multilingualentitylinkingbyneuraltypesystemevolution. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence32, 1 (2018). [82] Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. 2015. Faster R-CNN: Towards real-time object detection with region proposal networks. InProceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. C. Cortes, N. D. Lawrence, D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett (Eds.). Curran Associates, Inc., 91–99. [83] Orion F. Reyes-Galaviz, Witold Pedrycz, Ziyue He, and Nick J. Pizzi. 2017. A supervised gradient-based learning algorithm for optimized entity resolution.Data Knowl. Eng.112 (Nov. 2017), 106–129. [84] Sebastian Ruder. 2019.Neural Transfer Learning for Natural Language Processing. Ph.D. Dissertation. NUI Galway. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 37 =====
52:36 N. Barlaug and J. A. Gulla [85] OlgaRussakovsky,JiaDeng,HaoSu,JonathanKrause,SanjeevSatheesh,SeanMa,ZhihengHuang,AndrejKarpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. 2015. ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge.Int. J. Comput. Vis.115, 3 (Dec. 2015), 211–252. [86] M.SchusterandK.K.Paliwal.1997.Bidirectionalrecurrentneuralnetworks. IEEETrans.SignalProcess. 45,11(Nov. 1997), 2673–2681. [87] Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. 2016. Neural machine translation of rare words with subword units. InProceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, 1715–1725. [88] Z. Shang, Y Liu, G. Li, and J. Feng. 2016. K-Join: Knowledge-aware similarity join.IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.28, 12 (Dec. 2016), 3293–3308. [89] Rupesh Kumar Srivastava, Klaus Greff, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2015. Highway networks. (May 2015). arxiv:cs.LG/1505.00387 [90] Kostas Stefanidis, Vasilis Efthymiou, Melanie Herschel, and Vassilis Christophides. 2014. Entity resolution in the web of data. InProceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW’14).A C M ,N e wY o r k , NY, 203–204. [91] Zequn Sun, Wei Hu, Qingheng Zhang, and Yuzhong Qu. 2018. Bootstrapping entity alignment with knowledge graph embedding. InProceedings of the 27th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, California, 4396–4402. [92] IlyaSutskever,OriolVinyals,andQuocV.Le.2014.Sequencetosequencelearningwithneuralnetworks.In Proceed- ingsoftheAdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems .Z.Ghahramani,M.Welling,C.Cortes,N.D.Lawrence, and K. Q. Weinberger (Eds.). Curran Associates, Inc., 3104–3112. [93] John R. Talburt. 2011.Entity Resolution and Information Quality.E l s e v i e r . [94] SaravananThirumuruganathan,ShameemA.PuthiyaParambath,MouradOuzzani,NanTang,andShafiqJoty.2018. Reuse and adaptation for entity resolution through transfer learning. (Sept. 2018). arxiv:cs.DB/1809.11084 [95] Hung Nghiep Tran, Tin Huynh, and Tien Do. 2014. Author name disambiguation by using deep neural network. In Intelligent Information and Database Systems. Springer International Publishing, 123–132. [96] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Ł. Ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. InProceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (Eds.). Curran Associates, Inc., 5998–6008. [97] NorasesVesdapunt,KedarBellare,andNileshDalvi.2014.Crowdsourcingalgorithmsforentityresolution. Proceed- ings VLDB Endowment7, 12 (Aug. 2014), 1071–1082. [98] JiannanWang,TimKraska,MichaelJ.Franklin,andJianhuaFeng.2012.CrowdER:Crowdsourcingentityresolution. Proceedings VLDB Endowment5, 11 (Jul. 2012), 1483–1494. [99] JingdongWang,HengTaoShen,JingkuanSong,andJianqiuJi.2014.Hashingforsimilaritysearch:Asurvey.(Aug. 2014). arxiv:cs.DS/1408.2927 [100] StevenEuijongWhang,PeterLofgren,andHectorGarcia-Molina.2013.Questionselectionforcrowdentityresolu- tion.Proceedings VLDB Endowment6, 6 (Apr. 2013), 349–360. [101] D. R. Wilson. 2011. Beyond probabilistic record linkage: Using neural networks and complex features to improve genealogical record linkage. InProceedings of the 2011 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks. 9–14. [102] William E. Winkler. 1995. Matching and record linkage. InBusiness Survey Methods. 355–384.https://www.wiley. com/en-us/Business+Survey+Methods+-p-9780471598527. [103] William E. Winkler. 2006.Overview of Record Linkage and Current Research Directions. Technical Report. Statistical Research Division, U.S. Census Bureau. [104] L. Wolcott, W. Clements, and P. Saripalli. 2018. Scalable record linkage. InProceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data. 4268–4275. [105] LinWu,YangWang,andLingShao.2019.Cycle-consistentdeepgenerativehashingforcross-modal retrieval. IEEE Trans. Image Process.28, 4 (Apr. 2019), 1602–1612. [106] ZhilinYang,ZihangDai,YimingYang,JaimeCarbonell,RuslanSalakhutdinov,andQuocV.Le.2019.XLNet:Gener- alizedautoregressivepretrainingforlanguageunderstanding.In AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystem s 32 (2019). [107] YouLi,Dong-BoLiu,andWei-MingZhang.2005.Schemamatchingusingneuralnetwork.In Proceedingsofthe2005 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence (WI’05). 743–746. [108] Minghe Yu, Guoliang Li, Dong Deng, and Jianhua Feng. 2016. String similarity search and join: A survey.Front. Comput. Sci.10, 3 (Jun. 2016), 399–417. [109] J.Zhang,J.Li,S.Wang,andJ.Bian.2014.Aneuralnetworkbasedschemamatchingmethodforwebservicematching. InProceedings of the 2014 IEEE International Conference on Services Computing. 448–455. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.

===== PAGE 38 =====
Neural Networks for Entity Matching: A Survey 52:37 [110] Wei Zhang, Hao Wei, Bunyamin Sisman, Xin Luna Dong, Christos Faloutsos, and David Page. 2019. AutoBlock: A hands-offblockingframeworkforentitymatching.In Proceedingsofthe13thInternationalConferenceonWebSearch and Data Mining. 744–752. [111] Chen Zhao and Yeye He. 2019. Auto-EM: End-to-end fuzzy entity-matching using pre-trained deep models and transfer learning. InProceedings of the World Wide Web Conference (WWW’19). ACM, New York, NY, 2413–2424. [112] Zexuan Zhong, Yong Cao, Mu Guo, and Zaiqing Nie. 2018. CoLink: An unsupervised framework for user identity linkage. InProceedings of the 32nd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. [113] Hao Zhu, Ruobing Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2017. Iterative entity alignment via joint knowledge em- beddings. InProceedings of the 26th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI’17). AAAI Press, 4258–4264. Received March 2020; revised September 2020; accepted December 2020 ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 15, No. 3, Article 52. Publication date: April 2021.