
===== PAGE 1 =====
Vol.:(0123456789) User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction (2021) 31:941–977 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11257-021-09302-x 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research through reproducibility Alejandro Bellogín1 · Alan Said2 Received: 16 August 2019 / Accepted in revised form: 24 August 2021 / Published online: 21 October 2021 © The Author(s) 2021 Abstract Reproducibility is a key requirement for scientific progress. It allows the reproduc- tion of the works of others, and, as a consequence, to fully trust the reported claims and results. In this work, we argue that, by facilitating reproducibility of recom- mender systems experimentation, we indirectly address the issues of accountability and transparency in recommender systems research from the perspectives of prac- titioners, designers, and engineers aiming to assess the capabilities of published research works. These issues have become increasingly prevalent in recent literature. Reasons for this include societal movements around intelligent systems and arti- ficial intelligence striving toward fair and objective use of human behavioral data (as in Machine Learning, Information Retrieval, or Human–Computer Interaction). Society has grown to expect explanations and transparency standards regarding the underlying algorithms making automated decisions for and around us. This work surveys existing definitions of these concepts and proposes a coherent terminol- ogy for recommender systems research, with the goal to connect reproducibility to accountability. We achieve this by introducing several guidelines and steps that lead to reproducible and, hence, accountable experimental workflows and research. We additionally analyze several instantiations of recommender system implementations available in the literature and discuss the extent to which they fit in the introduced framework. With this work, we aim to shed light on this important problem and facilitate progress in the field by increasing the accountability of research. Keywords Reproducibility · Accountability · Evaluation · Recommender systems * Alejandro Bellogín alejandro.bellogin@uam.es Alan Said alansaid@acm.org 1 Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain 2 University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

===== PAGE 2 =====
942 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 1 Introduction Evaluation of Recommender Systems (RS) is an active and open research topic. A significant share of Recommender Systems research is based on comparisons of recommendation algorithms’ predictive accuracy: the better the evaluation scores (higher accuracy or lower predictive errors), the better the recommenda- tion. However, given the lack of agreement on evaluation procedures, this poses a hurdle for reproducible environments. Considering this scenario, it is difficult to put in context and gauge the results from a given evaluation of a recommender system. One key reason for this is the existence of countless design alternatives when implementing an evaluation strategy. Additionally, the actual implemen- tation of a recommendation algorithm can considerably diverge from the well- known, or ideal, formulation due to manual tuning and alignments to specific situations. This has recently been coined as data processing or data collection biases (Olteanu et al. 2018). The most well-known recommender system-related event to date, the Netflix Prize, created an environment where all competing algorithms were evaluated in the same controlled setting. The research advances accomplished during the Prize’s three-year run would not have been possible without a controlled evalua- tion and benchmarking environment. Having said this, we should also stress the importance of research conducted outside the scope of such actions. However, when it comes to recommendation, given that progress is traditionally measured in terms of higher precision, lower RMSE, higher NDCG, etc., it seems intuitive that some form of controlled evaluation could lead to a broader understanding of recommender system algorithms’ qualities in general and lessen the focus on in situ optimizations of deployment-dependent aspects. In this context, reproducibility and replicability of experiments have been gaining the community’s attention. Reproducibility is a cornerstone of scientific process and is one of two critical issues to achieve progress, as identified by Kon- stan and Adomavicius (2013), and one of the priorities that should be reflected in experimental methodologies according to Ferro et al. (2018). However, as pointed out by Collberg and Proebsting (2016), there are serious concerns in many research areas about this aspect. Collberg and Proebsting examined 601 confer - ence and journal papers published by the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). Among the papers, 402 had results backed by code, but the authors were able to obtain and compile the code within 30 minutes only for 32.3% papers. This opaqueness in research has led to directed efforts such as conference tracks aimed specifically for work covering these issues. Beyond those attempts at rais- ing awareness on this issue, suggested solutions have been made in the commu- nity, e.g., Brinckman et al. (2019) propose a general approach where research is presented as a living publication or tale. In doing so, improving and facilitating the knowledge discovery and dissemination of results, while supporting the entire life cycle of data used throughout research. Synchronously, accountability and transparency of algorithms—understood as the capability of accepting the responsibility for actions and the ability to

===== PAGE 3 =====
943 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… provide openness, respectively—or from a more general perspective, of any com- putational model, are gaining more attention. It should be emphasized, though, that these definitions are far from being universal, as we shall discuss later. For instance, Diakopoulos (2016) and Lepri et al. (2018) analyze accountability and transparency from the general viewpoint of algorithmic decision-making. Both works state that these aspects can be considered at different levels: the entire model, individual components (e.g., parameters), and a particular training algo- rithm. On a similar vein as publications can be seen as living tales, Dragicevic et al. (2019) suggest the use of explorable multiverses to increase the transpar - ency of research papers, giving the reader the possibility to interactively explore alternative analysis options. From a more general perspective, in Raji et al. (2020) the authors aim to close the accountability gap in Artificial Intelligence by defin- ing an end-to-end framework for internal algorithmic auditing. Such a framework would be applied throughout the internal organization development lifecycle. Going back to the Recommender Systems community, there exist few works addressing these aspects explicitly in the field, although related areas, e.g., Human–computer Interaction or Information Retrieval, have pursued this line of work more actively. However, the notation and terminology are not consist- ent across research works, even within the same field. As an example, the work presented by Abdul et al. (2018), which focuses on Human–computer Interaction, equates accountability to explaining the decisions made by the algorithm, which is more related to the concept of explainability; this definition differs from the one used in our work. One example where accountability is discussed in the context of recommender systems is the work by Ekstrand et al. (2015). The work argues that providing users with control over the generated recommendations would help establish trust to the system and lead to better retention and engagement. In this light, trust can be another dimension related, but not necessarily inherent, to accountability. Similarly, in the context of news Recommender Systems, some works have proposed implementations of transparent and “accountable” technolo- gies to foster trust and use since there is an urgent need to explore how these technologies should be designed to effectively implement and promote data pro- tection rights and obligations (Krebs et al. 2019). Therefore, an important gap that remains is how to develop accountable and transparent Recommender Sys- tems research in a general way. First of all, the overall notation and terminol- ogy about accountability, transparency, and even reproducibility are not uniform or globally used in the same way. Partially because of that, but mostly because of the incoherent and inconsistent results reported by several authors (Konstan and Adomavicius 2013; Ferro et al. 2018; Collberg and Proebsting 2016; Fer - rari Dacrema et al. 2019), accountability of recommendation research is difficult to achieve. Thus, a concrete roadmap toward achieving (or at least, increasing) this goal would be welcome. Potential solutions for this are expected to arrive from adding constraints on the experimental frameworks used in Recommender Systems research. Hence, we aim to analyze the required components that an ideal framework should satisfy to ensure some levels of accountability. Nonethe- less, full accountability is likely to be impossible to obtain; as a result, a collec- tion of challenges or limitations should also be included and discussed.

===== PAGE 4 =====
944 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 With these goals in mind, in this work we analyze these problems and address them in the following way. First, we revise the previously mentioned concepts (i.e., reproducibility, accountability, transparency) and their definitions for Recommender Systems research. Specifically, we present a brief review of different uses of these aspects in the general field of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and later focus on Recom- mender Systems. We then propose to address the issue of accountability in Recom- mender Systems research by focusing on the reproducibility of different stages that are typically defined within the workflow of any recommender system. Our driv - ing hypothesis is that advances on reproducible environments for recommendation could provide better accountability of Recommender Systems research, understood as appropriate mechanisms for reporting evaluation results. For that, we propose reproducibility guidelines, inspired by how recommendation systems are imple- mented and evaluated, and argue that these should improve accountability of the entire research field. By doing so, researchers and practitioners would benefit from being able to reproduce and compare against other works, while the community would, in turn, gain as a whole. We should be able to increase our understanding of the recommendation components in use, explain why certain stages are more impor- tant in some domains than in others, and advance on the directions with more poten- tial, thanks to well-grounded knowledge based on such accountable and transparent recommender systems. Finally, we include a discussion regarding some limitations of the proposed reproducible framework; we also show experiments where different recommendation libraries are compared to each other. In the remainder of this section, we present the research questions addressed in this work, as well as the main contributions achieved. 1.1 Research questions In this work, we address the following research questions: RQ1 Which are the main aspects that obstruct accountability in Recom- mender Systems research? As discussed before, accountability is related to reproducibility, which is an increasingly popular topic in this area (Ekstrand et al. 2011; Kosir et al. 2013; Said and Bellogín 2014). In our work, we focus on how to ensure some levels of reproducibility, so that transparency in reporting of experimental settings is increased and, as a consequence, the transparency of the corresponding results of recommender systems evaluation, which is a well-known catalyst for account- ability. RQ2 How can we formalize the required components for an accountable framework? Understanding that it is possible to strive for accountable recom- mendation research, we wonder what the requirements to build frameworks that allow this are. Hence, we propose a formal framework that embraces different aspects related to accountability of recommender systems. For this, we start the analysis from issues collected both from practical and theoretical perspectives in works addressing reproducibility in the area; we then analyze how different

===== PAGE 5 =====
945 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… software libraries for the development of recommendation systems fit under the proposed framework. RQ3 What are the main challenges and limitations to improve accountabil- ity in Recommender Systems research? Assuming that accountability can be improved by focusing on the reproducibility aspects of recommender systems, a discussion of the main challenges and limitations that remain open in this sce- nario should be included to have a full picture of the problem. We perform such an analysis, including experimental results and relying on recent research from adjacent fields to predict the potential challenges our field may witness in the near future. 1.2 Contributions We review concepts related to accountability and reproducibility, in particular in the context of Recommender Systems research, but also in adjacent contexts. Based on the definitions of those concepts, we propose to improve accountability of Recommender Systems research through reproducibility. This is achieved by analyzing technical constraints and typical problems or uncertainties that appear when implementing these systems. In particular, we have collected a wide range of issues from practical, theoretical, and technical aspects about the implemen- tation and evaluation of recommender systems. We have also considered recent works and trends on reproducibility in neighboring fields to extract more con- crete issues and guidelines for recommender systems. Upon this, we propose a set of requirements that lead to more reproducible experimental workflows, improving the mechanisms necessary for attaining accountable Recommender Systems: dataset collection, data splitting, recommendation, candidate item fil- tering, evaluation computation, and statistical testing. We analyze to what extent current Recommender Systems libraries fit such framework. Finally, we also include a thoughtful discussion on the limitations of this pro- posal, complemented with the foreseen challenges that need to be addressed in the near future. This discussion is complemented with experiments where we compare results from the internal evaluation mechanisms of two popular open- source recommendation frameworks. By doing so, we show that a lack of con- trol on the recommendation process leads to inconsistent results and, hence, to non-comparable and reproducible experimental outcomes. In conclusion, a framework for the evaluation of recommender systems should clearly identify and satisfy the proposed stages to ensure accountability in its entire process; otherwise, reproducibility and/or transparency will be com- promised and accountability of published research work will not be possible. We believe this general framework and the presented analyses and discussions will be valuable for practitioners, designers, or engineers who aim to assess the capa- bilities of published research on Recommender Systems.

===== PAGE 6 =====
946 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 1.3 Structure of paper The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents in detail the con- cepts that will be considered in this work (accountability, transparency, reproduc- ibility) and provides an overview of recommender systems, how they are evaluated and implemented. Section 3 discusses our approach of facilitating accountability through reproducibility; for this, prior works related to reproducibility in evaluation are discussed together with several technical aspects that should be considered when implementing and evaluating a recommender system. Then, in Sect. 4, we introduce the requirements for a reproducible and accountable recommendation environment, followed by an analysis of how the most common software libraries satisfy these requirements. Finally, Sect. 5 analyzes the main limitations and challenges of the presented work, and Sect. 6 concludes the paper and presents future work directions. 2 Background and concepts In this section, we provide an overview of the two foci of this work: accountability and recommender systems. The latter is presented and contextualized in Sect. 2.1, whereas the former, together with other related concepts used throughout this work, is introduced in Sect. 2.2. 2.1 Recommender systems With the growing popularity of Recommender Systems in recent years (Spotify, Netflix, Amazon, etc.), the recommender system-related research field has grown dramatically. Today, paper tracks on recommendation are common in many research outlets which traditionally have had different foci, e.g., SIGIR, The Web Confer - ence, IJCAI, etc. Related industry has experienced a similar development. As a sign of this, many open positions in machine learning, data science, and artifi- cial intelligence list experience of recommendation techniques and frameworks as requirements. This gain in popularity has led to an overwhelming amount of research being conducted over the last years. With this in mind, it becomes increasingly impor - tant to be able to reproduce new approaches and gauge their performance in various settings. In today’s recommender systems-related literature, papers often state what datasets, algorithms, baselines, and other potential parameter values are used in order to (theoretically) ensure reproducibility. Many research manuscripts addition- ally provide access to source code, present execution times, necessary hardware and software infrastructure, etc. Nonetheless, the works often use proprietary data and software, making it difficult, or impossible, to accurately reproduce the findings. In light of the vast variety of methods available for implementing and evaluating a rec- ommender system, details which aid in reproducibility and transparency should be seen as a very positive aspect. A critical analysis is necessary in order to ensure an

===== PAGE 7 =====
947 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… advance in the field, not just marginal effects based on strategic design choices (Fer - rari Dacrema et al. 2019). In fact, there have, over time, emerged several popular recommendation frame- works used throughout academia and industry, e.g., Apache Mahout 1 (henceforth referred to as Mahout) (Owen et al. 2011), LensKit2 (Ekstrand et al. 2011), MyMedi- aLite3 (Gantner et al. 2011), LibRec4 (Guo et al. 2015), and RankSys 5 (Vargas 2015), among others. As common with open-source frameworks, popularity and develop- ment efforts fluctuate over time. This can be seen in, for instance, MyMediaLite which was very popular a number of years ago, although its popularity dwindled as development came to a standstill. Mahout was once very popular in the Rec- ommender Systems community, but as the project changed direction and focused development on other tasks, the library has become seldom seen in research works in this space today. Nonetheless, we chose to include these two frameworks in the analysis presented in this paper due to their historical popularity and extensive usage in research publications and industry applications. Moreover, even though all five frameworks listed above provide basically the same set of recommendation algo- rithms, they have various differences in implementations, data management, and evaluation methods and approaches. Moreover, each of these frameworks provides basic evaluation packages able to calculate some of the most common metrics (e.g., precision, recall, root mean square error, mean average error, etc.); however, it is not clear how they compare against each other. Later, in Sect. 4.2 we will analyze the most representative ones and compare their differences. In any case, there is no doubt that these, and other, open-source recommendation frameworks, have been and are used consistently in research. However, the lack of a standard framework or implementation of algorithms and evaluation methodologies impedes the progress in the field, as evidenced in other areas. In this context, there are examples showing that, in, e.g., the Information Retrieval area, even when stand- ard datasets are used and a well-established set of baselines is known, no overall improvement over the years is guaranteed (Armstrong et al. 2009). A similar exam- ple exists in Ferrari Dacrema et al.’s (2019) analysis of deep learning approaches for Recommender Systems and in Sun et al.’s recent horizontal study of Recommender Systems papers (Sun et al. 2020). Analogously, in a series of prior works focusing on the evaluation, replication, and reproducibility of Recommender Systems algo- rithms and evaluation results, we have identified a set of aspects that need to be taken into consideration when comparing the results of recommender systems from different research papers, software frameworks, or evaluation contexts (Said and Bellogín 2014; Said et al. 2014; Said and Bellogín 2015). Specifically, a previously performed study (Said and Bellogín 2014) pointed out that comparisons of the same algorithms and datasets across different implementations (i.e., recommendation 1 http:// mahout. apache. org. 2 http:// lensk it. group lens. org. 3 http:// mymed ialite. net. 4 https:// guogu ibing. github. io/ librec/ index. html. 5 http:// ranks ys. org.

===== PAGE 8 =====
948 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 frameworks) showed large variations in results, both in accuracy-based metrics (like precision) and in holistic metrics (such as catalog coverage). 2.2 Accountability, reproducibility, and related concepts Researchers from different areas dealing with algorithms—from Social Sciences to Data Mining and Machine Learning, including the Information Retrieval and Rec- ommender Systems communities—have been raising awareness about account- ability, reproducibility, transparency, fairness, explanation, and similar concepts in recent years. However, these terms may have different nuances depending on the context, or might even appear as synonyms according to some authors. To establish a common terminology for this work, this section presents a review of such defini- tions and states how they will be used in the rest of the manuscript. Starting with reproducibility and replicability, we want to bring attention to the fact that these terms are often confused. In Plesser’s work on confused terminol- ogy (Plesser 2017), the author presents a historical review of the terms, discuss- ing differences and similarities to previous works. In this paper, we follow the defi- nitions provided by the ACM 6:repeatability applies when the same team operates under the same experimental setup, replicability is achieved when a different team obtains the same results using the same experimental setting, and reproducibility is obtained when a different group using their own experimental setup produces the same results. In fact, Plesser points out that the definitions of replicability and repro- ducibility used by the ACM, while conforming to their definitions in computing, are at odds with the terminology long used in the experimental sciences (we refer the reader to Plesser (2017) for more details about these works). Ivie and Thain (2018) discuss to what extent scientific computing is accurately reproducible. They extend the terminology around these concepts with terms such as verification, validation, and provenance, to account for variations in the data or tasks that could apply to computational experiments. The work presents several technical challenges that may appear when replicating different artifacts (commands or workflows). It does also show general techniques that could help in achieving reproducibility, mostly related to tracking all operations and actions related to an experiment and giving more importance to validation. Continuing, accountability is defined by Lepri et al. (2018) as the assumption of accepting the responsibility for actions and decisions. Moreover, an ACM statement on Algorithmic Transparency and Accountability7 calls for better algorithms in a num- ber of dimensions since the ubiquity of algorithms in our everyday lives is an impor- tant reason to focus on addressing challenges associated with the design and techni- cal aspects of algorithms and preventing bias from the onset. The statement lists the following 7 principles: awareness, access and redress, accountability, explanation, data provenance, auditability, validation, and testing. In particular, accountability is 6 https:// www. acm. org/ publi catio ns/ polic ies/ artif act- review- badgi ng. 7 https:// www. acm. org/ artic les/ bulle tins/ 2017/ janua ry/ usacm- state ment- algor ithmic- accou ntabi lity.

===== PAGE 9 =====
949 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… described as “Institutions should be held responsible for decisions made by the algo- rithms that they use, even if it is not feasible to explain in detail how the algorithms produce their results.” According to Jobin et al. (2019), very different actors are pointed out as being responsible (and accountable for) the actions and decisions of an Artificial Intelligence agent: developers, designers, institutions, or industry at large. In particular, Shin and Park (2019) specify that accountability in algorithms and their application begins with the designers and developers of the system that relies on them. Eventually, designers and managers are responsible for the consequences or impacts an algorithmic system has on stakeholders and society. However, there is no consensus on whether these agents should be held accountable in a human-like manner or whether humans should always be the only actors who are ultimately responsible for technological arti- facts (Jobin et al. 2019; Raji et al. 2020). A related concept is that of transparency, which Lepri et al. (2018) understand as the ability to provide openness and communication of both the data being ana- lyzed and the mechanisms underlying the models. Going beyond this definition, certain works discuss the implications of the concept. For instance, Shin and Park (2019) observe that perceptions of transparency and accuracy are not purely objec- tive responses to media content. In this sense, transparency and accuracy cannot be measured as features of algorithms or in the context of legal terminology because they involve subjective dimensions that can be experienced and perceived by users. Diakopoulos (2016) takes a more general perspective and argues that transparency can be a mechanism that facilitates accountability. Hereto we should demand it from government and exhort from industry; however, requiring complete source-code transparency of algorithms may be counterproductive. Instead, Diakopoulos advo- cates for the disclosure of only necessary pieces of information, including aggre- gated results and benchmarks, since these elements would be more effective in com- municating algorithmic performance to the public. Moreover, transparency around human involvement might involve explaining the goal, purpose, and intent of the algorithm, including editorial goals and the human editorial process. More specifically, in research the control is on the researchers, or the authors of an investigation, hence, according to this definition, they have to disclose as much information as possible to provide transparency and improve its accountability. The same author adds that inferences made by an algorithm, such as classifications or predictions, often leave questions about the accuracy or potential for error. Because of that, algorithm creators might consider benchmarking against standard datasets and with standard measures of accuracy to disclose some key sta- tistics. This is directly connected to the concepts of reproducibility and replicability mentioned earlier. 3 Accountability of recommender systems research through reproducibility In this section, we motivate how accountability (as defined in the previous section) could be achieved in Recommender Systems research by means of reproducibility. First, in Sect. 3.1 we introduce some issues collected from practical aspects found

===== PAGE 10 =====
950 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 when implementing these systems; later, in Sect. 3.2 we provide a more general overview of trends and research works that have explicitly addressed reproducibility in the area. Finally, Sect. 3.3 summarizes and connects these issues and trends while presenting how they must be exploited to improve accountability. 3.1 Reproducibility issues from practical and technical aspects in recommender systems There are several aspects when designing and implementing a recommender sys- tem that may affect its final results and hinder its transparency, making it virtu- ally impossible to replicate the reported settings and insights. From using different model parameters to how specific parts of the system are implemented. In this sec- tion, we review some examples we have encountered while implementing recom- mendation algorithms and frameworks ourselves, checking public implementations, and trying to replicate other researchers’ experiments and results (Said and Bellogín 2014, 2015). In the next section, we propose the requirements that any evaluation framework should satisfy to facilitate reproducibility of the research works, based on these examples. One of the first steps taken when running a recommender system consists of dividing a dataset into training and test splits, in some circumstances a validation split is also created (Shani and Gunawardana 2011). It is understood that the data splitting strategy may have a deep impact on the final results, making this an impor- tant aspect to take into account when reporting details about an experiment. For instance, by using a per-user data splitting technique, we ensure that all the users are considered in the evaluation. This may not be realistic in all cases, since all users are not active simultaneously. On the other hand, by performing a temporal split— which likely is the closest data splitting strategy to a real-world scenario (Campos et al. 2014)—the models are more sensitive to temporal dependencies on the train- ing and test splits. For instance, temporal spikes on particular items that might skew popularity patterns and not represent the historical behavior in that system. In both cases, the data splitting strategy dramatically changes the inherent conditions of the experiment, whereas in the first case, every user is active at evaluation time. In the second case, the set of active users will depend on the level of interaction at, and after, the temporal point where the split is performed, which, additionally, ensures no future information is used to train the models. Nonetheless, most of the practical issues related to reproducibility concern either technical implementations of the actual algorithm, or how the evaluation of the sys- tem was performed. We now review several examples regarding these two angles. Regarding the recommendation algorithms, there are several aspects that are not standardized which, eventually, turn out to be implementation-dependent. For example, the term kNN (to specify: collaborative filtering algorithms based on k-nearest neighbors) is usually linked to the user-based (UB) variation in these methods. However, item based (IB) also fall into the kNN category and often out- perform the user-based counterparts (Sarwar et al. 2001). Furthermore, there exist several different formulations of the user-based kNN algorithm, neither of which is

===== PAGE 11 =====
951 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… regarded as the “standard” one. It could be argued that Goldberg et al.’s (1992) ini- tial formulation can be seen as the classical standard formulation, and that other formulations are simply variations that aim at achieving better performance. In this context, each of the formulations in Equations 1, 2, or 3 could be referred to as UB kNN, and unless further details are provided, knowing which of the three is used by the authors of a paper is virtually impossible: Note that in one of these formulations (Eq. 2) the user’s average rating ̄ru is consid- ered, whereas in the last case the summation is not normalized, with the effect that the generated score is not in the range of ratings anymore. This variation has proved to obtain much better results than the others in tasks that return a ranking instead of predicting the rating (Cremonesi et al. 2010). In fact, some libraries implement two versions of these methods (such as MyMediaLite or LibRec), highlighting the importance of providing these details. Analogous to algorithmic variation, the similarity weight between two users (denoted wuv above) is a critical aspect for kNN recommenders, and decisions made about them can profoundly affect how the algorithm behaves. The decision on which similarity metric to use should be clearly specified and reported. Then, any filter - ing or transformation applied to the similarity values must be clearly specified. For example, some libraries like Mahout 8 move the similarity domain from [−1, 1] to [0, 2] to avoid negative weights in the summation. Other implementations simply discard those negative similarities or allow to discard anything below a specific threshold (see LibRec9 or MyMediaLite10). In other cases, two similarity metrics are used: one to find the neighbors (i.e., to define Ni(u) ) and a different one to weight the ratings in whatever variation in the UB kNN algorithm we are using—although (1)̂rui = ∑ v∈N i(u)rviwuv ∑ v∈ Ni(u) �wuv� (2)̂rui = ̄ru + ∑ v∈N i(u)(rvi − ̄rv)wuv ∑ v∈N i(u)�wuv� (3)̂rui = /uni2211.s1 v∈N i(u) rviwuv 8 See normalizeWeightResult function in https:// github. com/ apache/ mahout/ blob/ trunk/ commu nity/ mahout- mr/ mr/ src/ main/ java/ org/ apache/ mahout/ cf/ taste/ impl/ simil arity/ Abstr actSi milar ity. java (retrieved: April 2020). 9 See predict function in https:// github. com/ guogu ibing/ librec/ blob/3. 0.0/ core/ src/ main/ java/ net/ librec/ recom mender/ cf/ UserK NNRec ommen der. java (retrieved: April 2020). 10 See GetPositivelyCorrelatedEntities function in https:// github. com/ zenog antner/ MyMed iaLite/ blob/ master/ src/ MyMed iaLite/ Corre lation/ Exten sions. cs (retrieved: April 2020), which is used in the UserKNN and ItemKNN implementations.

===== PAGE 12 =====
952 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 it is more common to use the same metric for both steps; the same comments about similarity transformation and filtering apply if it is used for finding neighbors. There also exist different alternatives in the literature regarding the task of finding neighbors. Although this typically means taking the top-k closest users to the target user, there are other techniques based on thresholds that should be properly reported and specified when used in experiments because of their unpopularity (Desrosiers and Karypis 2011). There are also ad hoc implementations in some libraries 11. Besides that, a very important detail that is often overlooked is the exact moment at which neighbors are found: at training or test (i.e., evaluation) time. In both cases, similarities between users are needed; however, in the latter approach the computa- tion of the list of potential neighbors is delayed until a prediction is needed. This means that the neighborhood can be tailored to those neighbors that have actually rated the target item (as evidenced in the notation used before as Ni(u) instead of simply N(u) ), achieving higher values of coverage and impacting on the optimal number of neighbors required (lower for the delayed computation)—this can be found in Surprise12, for instance. Nonetheless, this approach would not be practical in a real-world system, as it would require having instantaneous access to either the full similarity matrix, or the full list of users sorted by similarity for every user. Both issues are avoided by computing the full similarity matrix offline and only storing the top-k closest neighbors to be used at test time. Another paradigmatic example, besides different formulations for kNN and their related issues presented above, is how a user’s average rating is computed (a param- eter needed by some similarity metrics, such as Pearson’s correlation, and in Equa- tion 2). In theory, the user’s average rating should be computed taking into account all her ratings; however, this implies a first pass on the whole dataset is needed and a value for every user is stored in memory. For computational reasons, it is rea- sonable to delay this process until a prediction involving the user is needed. The issue becomes evident when, in some implementations, this computation is only performed for the items that a user pair have in common (for example, in Mahout13). This would generate noticeably divergent results for different implementations, even though the reported algorithm is the same; see Table 1 for an actual comparison. In this toy example, we observe how the similarity score between users changes depending on how the users’ average ratings are computed. Even though the actual difference is small (from 0.96 to 1.0), it illustrates the potential divergences that could accumulate with more data. The last aspect about recommendation algorithms we focus on is related to the final predicted score. Until relatively recently, much of the recommendation litera- ture focused on the rating prediction task, overlooking other tasks, and, particularly 13 See functions userSimilarity and itemSimilarity in https:// github. com/ apache/ mahout/ blob/ trunk/ commu nity/ mahout- mr/ mr/ src/ main/ java/ org/ apache/ mahout/ cf/ taste/ impl/ simil arity/ Abstr actSi milar ity. java (retrieved: April 2020). 11 See note about SnapshotNeighborhoodFinder in https:// java. lensk it. org/ docum entat ion/ algor ithms/ user- user/ (retrieved: April 2020). 12 See estimate function in https:// github. com/ Nicol asHug/ Surpr ise/ blob/ master/ surpr ise/ predi ction_ algor ithms/ knns. py (retrieved: April 2020).

===== PAGE 13 =====
953 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… the most prominent one nowadays: item ranking. As a result, it is easy to find imple- mentations where a capping is applied after the score is predicted, binding the score by the rating range. However, this may be problematic when producing a ranking instead of a rating. Since ties are more likely to occur, leading to the necessity of tie-breaking strategies. These may, however, have strong effects on the results, espe- cially when short rankings are considered (Bellogín et al. 2013). This is something seldom found explicitly in the analyzed frameworks and public implementations14. Furthermore, what is even more important is what happens when a recommender cannot predict a score. This decision has an impact on the system’s coverage. If a baseline (also called backup or fallback) recommender is used, all algorithms will have full coverage. This will, in turn, also have an effect on how performance met- rics are evaluated. For instance, when producing a ranking, one may decide that those items without a score will always appear at the bottom of the ranking. This could produce very different results compared to skipping those items altogether, especially in cases with extreme coverage problems or when using highly configur - able evaluation strategies (such as the One-Plus-Random methodology from (Bel- logín et al. 2011)). Additionally, when computing error-based metrics such as Mean Absolute Error, which measures the difference between the predicted and the actual rating, handling of missing values is not evident: they could be ignored (hence measuring the error only on available predictions) or a default value could be used instead (as if a baseline recommender would be used). See Table 2 for a toy example on these different alternatives. In the analyzed frameworks, various solutions have been detected: using a recommender that can always return a score whenever the main one is not capable of that 15, using default values when some operations (such as similarities) do not have enough data or cannot be computed9 , or leaving the orig- inal recommender untouched, hence producing missing values and exposing its lack of coverage. Now let us move to the issues related to how the system is evaluated. As pre- sented before, technical decisions about the algorithm implementation could affect the results of evaluation metrics. Moreover, as mentioned earlier regarding the algo- rithms, in the Recommender Systems community there are no well-established defi- nitions for all the evaluation metrics (yet), as is common in other areas like Machine Learning or Information Retrieval. Thus, it is possible to find papers presenting dif- ferent variations in the Mean Absolute Error metric: either the classical one, or nor - malized by the range of ratings, or even computed on a user-basis and then averaged. Some works do not report the cutoffs for ranking metrics or it is not clear which discounting function is being used for the Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain 14 In particular, among the analyzed frameworks, only RankSys sorts the items according to anything else besides the score. 15 As described in https:// java. lensk it. org/ docum entat ion/ basics/ confi gurat ion/ (retrieved: April 2020), LensKit provides default settings which should be overriden to have full control; for an example of how MyMediaLite predicts a score by using a default recommender see https:// github. com/ zenog antner/ MyMed iaLite/ blob/ master/ src/ MyMed iaLite/ Ratin gPred iction/ UserK NN. cs (retrieved: April 2020).

===== PAGE 14 =====
954 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 (NDCG) metric (Järvelin and Kekäläinen 2002). In some cases, it was also impos- sible to determine how the relevance score was obtained from the rating withheld in test16. Another important aspect is that of the candidate item selection. As studied by Bellogín et al. (2011), the strategy used to select which items are to be ranked by the recommender plays a significant role in both the range of the performance values and the relative order of the recommendation algorithms. While this fact is being increasingly recognized by the community (Krichene and Rendle 2020), there are still several gaps regarding this critical part of the recommendation pipeline; the most obvious one consists of acknowledging which strategy is being used and report it accordingly, along with any parameter required to accurately reproduce such experimental setting. 3.2 Reproducibility Issues from other research works and recent trends As mentioned before, reproducibility in Recommender Systems research focuses on how reproducible the evaluation of such systems really is. This is evidenced in, e.g., the call for papers of the reproducibility track 17 of the 2020 ACM Recommender Systems conference (RecSys), where papers should repeat prior experiments with original source code using original datasets or new contexts. However, in, e.g., Information Retrieval, there is a growing concern that reproducibility is a process which in particular calls for the long-term sustainability of reproducibility efforts, as supported by Lin and Zhang’s work (Lin and Zhang 2020). In that work, the authors Table 1 Toy example showing the value of a user’s average rating considering all items ( ̄ru ) or only those in common with the other user Pearson’s correlation similarity metric between users ( wuv = ∑ i (rui − ̄ru)(rvi − ̄rv)∕ √∑ i (rui − ̄ru)2 ∑ i (rvi − ̄rv)2 ) is also presented when considering these two variations for the average rat- ing Items User 1 User 2 i1 5 3 i2 3 1 i3 4 2 i4 4 i5 3 ̄ru 4 2.25 Overlap ̄ru 4 2 Pearson using ̄ru 0.96 Pearson using overlap ̄ru 1.0 16 Specifically, we have found that LensKit, LibRec, Mahout, MyMediaLite, and RankSys use a loga- rithmic discount, although RankSys normalizes the relevance with respect to a provided threshold and others (like Mahout) do not consider the rating in the computation. 17 Full text in https:// recsys. acm. org/ recsy s20/ call/# conte nt- tab-1- 1- tab (retrieved: April 2020).

===== PAGE 15 =====
955 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… were not able to replicate a number of reproducible experiments four years after they had been published. Also coming from the Information Retrieval community, we find recent works dealing with the problem of generality of results, as well as nega- tive results and design choices when implementing tools and evaluation campaigns with this goal in mind (Arguello et al. 2015; Ferro et al. 2018, 2019; Breuer et al. 2020). Specific issues extracted from these works include, e.g., sometimes it is not obvious how a (theoretical) method really is implemented in a framework, in par - ticular due to potentially hidden and undocumented parameters, or that the imple- mentation might change between versions of the same software (Arguello et al. 2015). Breuer et al. (2020) analyze the important question of when reproduced is reproduced, that is, how to objectively quantify that an experiment has been repli- cated or reproduced. In this context, the work proposes several measures at differ - ent granularities and introduced a reproducibility-oriented dataset for Information Retrieval tasks. Even though reproducibility tracks have become a common component in aca- demic conferences in recent years, many of the topically relevant conferences still lack one. One of the first tracks of this type was at a workshop at ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM) in 2017 [1]. Also in 2017 a series of workshops on this topic started in the Machine Learning community, fol- lowed by the 2017 and 2018 editions of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) and the 2019 International Conference on Learning Represen- tations (ICLR). ACM RecSys had its first installment of the reproducibility track in 2020. Additionally, at the time of writing, we found the 2019 and 2020 editions of the European Conference on Information Retrieval (ECIR), ACM MultiMedia (MM) in 2020, and the 2020 edition of the International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC). In ACM MM, this track was the first time it happened in this conference; the organizers only accepted authors with an accepted paper in the previous edition of the conference, since the goal is to document and record the artifacts needed to carry out the experiments of the previously published research work. In ISWC, simi- larly, the track was restricted for accepted authors but, in this case, of the same edi- tion. A similar idea is behind the recent Reproducibility Challenge at ICLR. While Table 2 Toy example showing different values of mean absolute error (MAE) and root mean squared error (RMSE) values depending on how missing predicted values (denoted as NaN) are considered by the metric The best system in each case is highlighted in bold User-item pairs Real System 1 System 2 System 3 (u1, i1) 5 4 NaN 4 (u1, i2) 3 2 4 NaN (u1, i3) 1 1 NaN 1 (u2, i1) 3 2 4 NaN MAE/RMSE, ignoring NaNs 0.75 / 0.87 2.00 / 2.00 0.50 / 0.70 MAE/RMSE, NaNs as 0 0.75 / 0.87 2.00 / 2.65 1.75 / 2.18 MAE/RMSE, NaNs as 3 0.75 / 0.87 1.50 / 1.58 0.25 / 0.50

===== PAGE 16 =====
956 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 these tracks are relatively new, similar initiatives have been surfacing during the last decade, e.g., as a workshop at ACM RecSys in 2013 (Bellogín et al. 2013). These venues allow researchers to analyze the effect of different implementations of an approach, or explore the extent to which the results may change when a different dataset than the one reported in a paper is used (Kowald et al. 2020; Kamphuis et al. 2020). Often, the works published in these tracks contain publicly available code and/or datasets. However, a common complaint on these papers is the difficulty of perfectly reproducing the experiments from the papers, even when the code is avail- able (which is not very common Collberg and Proebsting 2016; Ferrari Dacrema et al. 2019), and in some cases the attempts have to be discarded because inquir - ies sent to the original authors related to code or data remain unanswered (Fer - rari Dacrema et al. 2019; Lin and Zhang 2020; Kamphuis et al. 2020). A number of conferences have adopted ACM badges6 and award these according to different criteria: functional, reusable, available, validated, reproduced, replicated. However, at the time of writing, all application procedures for these badges are not established yet. In general, badges are awarded to works that already meet some established standards (i.e., the paper is already accepted to a conference or journal). An instantiation of this process can be found for the MM conference 18, where, as a significant difference in the standard review process, reviewers of the reproduc- ible papers become co-authors of the final reproducibility paper due to the expected heavy burden necessary to review such submission. This can be seen as hard evi- dence of the work load required to make sure that a research work is reproducible. Finally, it is worth mentioning the report from a recent Dagshtul seminar dedi- cated to the reproducibility of data-oriented experiments in e-science (Freire et al. 2016), even though the Recommender Systems community is omitted in the report. The report mentions that reproducible experiments are not only beneficial for others, but also for the researcher or practitioner executing them. The reasoning is that they require the researcher to document the entire experimental settings, which makes post hoc analysis possible. As a result, the report states that the experiment can be easily audited, making accountability quite straightforward. The report presents tools that may improve the reproducibility of the experiments and additionally, the output of several working groups which addressed different aspects of the reproduc- ibility problem: who are the main actors, defining guidelines for authors, editors, and others, and a list of the incentives and barriers to reproducibility. 3.3 Summary and discussion Based on the previous definition of accountability, we propose to use the label accountable Recommender Systems research for works that: a) deal with recom- mender systems while the executing parties (the researchers) are held account- able for the presented results and b) when these experiments are to (some extent 19) 18 See https:// proje ct. inria. fr/ acmmm repro ducib ility/ (retrieved: April 2020). 19 By considering the extended definition of the ACM statement on Algorithmic Transparency and Accountability.

===== PAGE 17 =====
957 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… explainable by the researcher. In combination, these requirements mean that the results can be generated in a deterministic and guided way, making them possible to be audited. Moreover, in this section, we have collected a series of reproducibility issues col- lected either from practical and direct connection with the implementation of rec- ommender systems, or from published papers and other venues where reproducibil- ity has been studied by itself. We argue that, by increasing the reproducibility of research works, accountability will improve, since reproducible environments guar - antee that the results can be audited and, under some constraints, repeated, facilitat- ing that the same conclusions will be found. Moreover, in recent years, the opposite seems, unfortunately, to be true. Recent studies indicate that the results of papers which are difficult to reproduce generate doubts about their conclusions and, in turn, the responsibility of the authors for the actions or decisions drawn in the paper will not hold (Collberg and Proebsting 2016; Ferrari Dacrema et al. 2019). Therefore, we advocate for a reproducible environment in Recommender Systems research and, in particular, for evaluation of these types of systems, so as to enforce certain levels of accountability in this ever-growing research field. In the next sec- tion, based on the collected issues and conclusions drawn in previous sections, we propose a set of requirements as potential guidelines to achieve reproducible and accountable recommender system evaluation. 4 A reproducible (and accountable) recommender systems framework for evaluation Building on experiences described in the previous section, a study on recommender system evaluation across software frameworks (Said and Bellogín 2014), works on benchmarking and evaluation (Said et al. 2014; Bellogín et al. 2011), as well as on reproducibility of evaluation results (Said and Bellogín 2015), a set of requirements for ensuring the accountability and reproducibility of Recommender Systems have been identified as necessary tasks in the recommendation process. This section gives, first, an overview and motivation of these tasks, and later a possible instantia- tion of such a framework, linking it to the available libraries in the Recommender System area. 4.1 Required Stages for an accountable recommender system evaluation Figure 1 presents a step-by-step overview of the research process in Recommender Systems. Various stages in the figure, i.e., Dataset collection, Data splitting, Recom- mendation, Candidate Item Filtering, Evaluation, and Statistical Testing, correspond to separate stages which form the complete pipeline of a typical research recom- mender system. The goal of this section is to report which stages in Recommender System evaluation should be documented and to what extent, showing an array of different possibilities so researchers are aware there are some alternatives that need to be explicitly specified. Next, we describe each of these stages.

===== PAGE 18 =====
958 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 4.1.1 Dataset collection The collection step represents the initial stage where data are collected and then doc- umenting the process of how the data were collected, and whether, e.g., certain pre- filtering or other modifications were performed on the data. This is often overlooked in papers, especially so in cases where public datasets are used. Nevertheless, it is important to consider how the dataset has been altered prior to having been released to the public. Examples of this include Movielens20M 20 where “All selected users had rated at least 20 movies,” the 2017 RecSys Challenge (Abel et al. 2017) where the dataset preprocessing details are withheld, and MovieTweetings (Dooms et al. 2013) which states that the data are collected via a third party which in turn does not guarantee completeness. A possible solution for this would come in the form of datasheets, as proposed in Gebru et al. (2018). In that work, the authors recommend to include, with every dataset, documentation regarding its creation, composition, intended uses, maintenance, and other useful properties. In the RS domain, this may be used by users of the datasets, to show the type of filters or processes made to the original data. 4.1.2 Data splitting The data splitting procedure, taking place before recommendation, is an important step in the experimental configuration of a recommender system. How datasets are partitioned into training and test sets may have considerable impact on the final per- formance. It may be favorable to certain recommenders, and hurtful to others, con- sequently resulting in better or worse performance depending on how the partition- ing is configured. A few common approaches for data splitting follow below. First, we can choose whether or not splitting will be temporal (Gunawardana and Shani 2009). Temporal approaches require the availability of user interaction data timestamps. A simple approach is to select a point in time in the available data time- line, and separate training data (all interaction records prior to that point) and test data (dated after the split time point). The split point can be set so as to, for instance, have a desired training/test ratio in the experiment. The ratio can be global, with a single common split point for all users, or user-specific, to ensure the same ratio per user. Temporal approaches have the advantage of more realistically mimick - ing working application scenarios, where “future” user positive interactions (which would translate to positive response to recommendations by the system) are to be predicted based on past evidence. As an example, the well-known Netflix prize pro- vided a dataset where the test set for each user consisted on her most recent rat- ings (Bennett et al. 2007). There are a number of common strategies ignoring time. We outline the following three strategies that select the items to appear in the test set: a) sample a fixed num- ber (potentially different) for each user—this is a common approach to test cold-start scenarios, as done by, e.g., Kluver and Konstan (2014); b) sample a fixed number for 20 http:// files. group lens. org/ datas ets/ movie lens/ ml- 20m- README. html.

===== PAGE 19 =====
959 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… each user (equivalent for all users), also known as given n or all but n protocols; c) sample a percentage of all the interactions using cross validation, where non-over - lapping subsets are generated, that is, every (user, item, rating) tuple is evaluated once. The last protocol, c, appears to be the most popular (Goldberg et al. 2001; Sar - war et al. 2001), although all but n protocol is not uncommon (Breese et al. 1998; Wang et al. 2008). Independently from the dataset partitioning, the goals set for an evaluation may be different depending on situation, requiring the development of different settings (and, in turn, partitioning protocols) (Herlocker et al. 2004; Gunawardana and Shani 2009). If this is ignored, the results obtained in a particular setting can become biased and thus not suitable to use in further experiments. In light of this, specify - ing which partitioning protocol is used in the experiments is a crucial parameter to ensure reproducibility and objective results. 4.1.3 Recommendation Once the training and test data partitions are available, recommendations are pro- duced according to different algorithms. In an evaluation, the recommendation component is the only one that should differ when comparing two recommendation algorithms. In particular, one and the same algorithm implemented in two differ - ent recommendation frameworks should produce equivalent recommendations when fed with the same input. However, after performing a side-by-side comparison of the same algorithms in different frameworks, we see that the recommendations can Train Test Validate Spli/g427ng Recommenda/g415on Ranking Predic/g415on Coverage Diversity Evalua/g415on Collec/g415on Sta/g415s/g415cal Tes/g415ng Candidate Item Filtering Fig. 1 Recommendation process distilled into several subtasks or stages

===== PAGE 20 =====
960 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 differ widely, as reported in previous work (Said and Bellogín 2014). There are mul- tiple reasons for this; some of them are listed in the previous section, such as design choices related to the implementations and different algorithm parameter settings. 4.1.4 Candidate item filtering Candidate item filtering, or candidate item generation as it sometimes is referred to, specifies which of the recommended items will be used to measure the performance of the recommendation, in particular, the items that actually generate a ranking. It may be reasonable to perform this step prior to recommendation; however, the rec- ommendation process described in Fig. 1 assumes that the previous stage predicts all the available recommendations for a user, and hence, in this step a filtering is per- formed. In the event of application of multiple strategies, this ordering of the steps is more efficient, since it allows to compute the recommendations only once. Moreover, we may want to measure recommendation performance based on pre- dictive accuracy (the error with respect to the predicted rating) or ranking-based precision. Both gauges have their limitations: whereas the former needs the recom- mender to be able to output a score meaningful as a rating, the latter is sensitive to the number of unknown items included in the generated ranking, and how they are selected (Bellogín et al. 2011). We shortly describe two strategies below (we refer to prior works on this topic, e.g., (Said and Bellogín 2014; Bellogín et al. 2011) for more). • UserTest This strategy takes the same target item sets as error-based evaluation. That is, for each user u, the list Lu of candidate items to be ranked consists of items rated by u in the test set. This strategy selects the smallest set of target items for each user, including no unrated items at all. It needs a relevance thresh- old to indicate which of the items in the user’s test are considered relevant. This strategy is used by, e.g., Jambor and Wang (2010a, 2010b) with the relevance threshold set to 4 in a 1–5 rating scale, and by Basu et al. (1998) with an indi- vidual, per-user, threshold. • TrainItems Every item rated by some user in the system is selected—except items rated by the target user. This strategy is useful when simulating a real system where no test is available (at prediction time) because it does not need to look into it to generate the rankings. 4.1.5 Evaluation This stage is devoted to the task of measuring the performance of the produced scores, i.e., to evaluate them. Depending on the type of evaluation metric, the previous step described (candidate item filtering) may or may not be required. Specifically, for error- based metrics like mean absolute error (MAE) and root mean square error (RMSE), predicting only for the items in the test set is adequate, even though in the recom- mendation step (Sect. 4.1.3) predictions for all the items in the dataset might be pro- duced. Nevertheless, reporting coverage of the methods is essential—both in terms of user coverage (number of users that receive at least one recommendation) and catalog

===== PAGE 21 =====
961 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… coverage (percentage of all the items that can be recommended) (Shani and Guna- wardana 2011). Considering that if we do not use a baseline or backup recommender, the recommender might not return all requested suggestions. If we expect to receive 10 recommendations for a user but only get 8 from a specific recommender, we would measure the performance based on those 8 items instead of the requested recommen- dation length. As stated by Herlocker et al. (2004), this is a well-known problem, the only solution to date is to report both accuracy and coverage metrics at the same time, although some approaches have been proposed recently to address this issue (Mesas and Bellogín 2017). Ranking-based metrics like precision, recall, normalized discounted cumulative gain (NDCG), and mean reciprocal rank (MRR) aim to capture the quality of a particular ranking, taking into account that the user has expressed a preference toward some of those items, typically those in the test split rated above a certain threshold (Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto 2011). The candidate item filtering stage will change the value com- puted with these metrics. This is due to a different ranking being evaluated, although the order of the recommenders does not necessarily have to change. An observation made previously (Bellogín et al. 2011) highlights that one of the main differences in the results is the range of the evaluation metrics. 4.1.6 Statistical testing Finally, the last stage in the proposed protocol concerns the outcome of the evaluation step: any statistical testing procedure performed over such data should be accurately reported and, if possible, a motivation of its usage should be included. Check for signif- icance in the results or in the difference between a method and a baseline is possible via various means, e.g., paired/unpaired tests, effect size, confidence intervals, etc. Sakai (2014). This cements the importance of clarity and granularity of details while, addi- tionally, to facilitate the interpretation of the results, related statistics such as the mean, variance, and population size of the samples should be reported. More importantly, when performing any type of statistical testing, the data on which statistical method was computed must be specified. As with many aspects in recom- mendation, there is no standard procedure for this. This is especially problematic in cases when using cross-validated partitions, in turn using more than one test partition and, as an effect obtaining more than one performance measurement. A possibility due to this is drawing inconsistent conclusions about the significance of the results if per- formed on a split basis, e.g., a significant difference is found in some folds but not in others. On the other hand, concatenating the results from each split (on a user basis, as done in Information Retrieval for queries) may distort the test, due the data points not being independent (one user appears more than once), and the number of points increases substantially (Bouckaert 2003; Kosir et al. 2013). 4.2 Instantiations of accountable experimental frameworks In the previous section, we defined a set of requirements for reproducible Recom- mender Systems evaluation. Now, we analyze the extent to which the required stages

===== PAGE 22 =====
962 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 proposed before are implemented in a series of recommendation libraries and frame- works. We want to emphasize that simply using a library—as long as this informa- tion is reported—increases the transparency of the research work, but it may not provide full accountability, since there might be reproducibility issues in how the library was used or in any of the stages not supported by such library. For this, we need to be aware that most recommendation frameworks already define some evaluation functionality. Commonly, a number of evaluation metrics are available, together with some utility class allowing to execute recommendation and get the performance values corresponding to those metrics. More specifically, these are the capabilities—at the moment of writing—of a selection 21 of libraries in Rec- ommender Systems research in terms of the stages previously introduced: – Apache Mahout (version 14.1 22): data splitting (on-the-fly), recommendation, evaluation (error and ranking metrics). – CaseRec (version 1.1.023): data splitting, recommendation, evaluation (error and ranking metrics), statistical testing. – LensKit (version 3.0 in Java24 and 0.10.1 in Python25): data splitting, recommen- dation, candidate item filtering (not in Python), evaluation (error and ranking metrics). – LibRec (version 3.0.0 26): data splitting, recommendation, evaluation (error and ranking metrics). – MyMediaLite (version 3.1227): data splitting (on-the-fly), recommendation, eval- uation (error and ranking metrics). – RankSys (version 0.4.328): recommendation, candidate item filtering, evaluation (ranking metrics). – Surprise (version 1.1.1 29): data splitting (on-the-fly), recommendation, evalua- tion (error metrics). Since they are mostly focused on providing a (sometimes exhaustive) set of recom- mendation algorithms, none of these frameworks satisfies at the same time all the requirements presented before. Even when some requirements are fulfilled, they are not designed to support a reproducible and transparent environment. The most clear example can be found with the second stage—data splitting—which in most situ- ations is the first stage in the experiment (since the dataset is often created by an external party). For instance, RankSys does not perform any data splitting, while 21 These libraries and frameworks were selected based on the most frequently cited software in the com- munity in the last years. For this analysis, the authors checked mainly papers published in ACM RecSys. 22 https:// github. com/ apache/ mahout/ tree/ mahout- 14.1. 23 https:// github. com/ caser ec/ CaseR ecomm ender/ tree/1. 1.0. 24 https:// github. com/ lensk it/ lensk it/ tree/ lensk it-3. 0- M2. 25 https:// github. com/ lensk it/ lkpy/ tree/0. 10.1. 26 https:// github. com/ guogu ibing/ librec/ tree/3. 0.0/. 27 https:// github. com/ zenog antner/ MyMed iaLite/ tree/ v3. 12. 28 https:// github. com/ RankS ys/ RankS ys/ tree/0. 4.3. 29 https:// github. com/ Nicol asHug/ Surpr ise/ tree/ v1.1.1.

===== PAGE 23 =====
963 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… some frameworks (such as Mahout and MyMediaLite) create the splits in mem- ory, generating different splits each time the experiment is run—unless some seed parameter is set. Nonetheless, there are other open-source recommendation frame- works that support, to some extent, reproducible experimental settings: – DaisyRec (unversioned30) is a recent framework developed in pyTorch focused on benchmarking previous research works, as described by Sun et al. (2020). It does not support statistical testing, error metrics, or the candidate item filtering component presented before, but it implements different strategies for negative sampling. – Idomaar (version 4.0.0 31) was developed in the context of the EU FP7 project CrowdRec. It includes a suite of recommendation algorithms and supports both batch training and online streaming data based on Apache Kafka modules. It is focused on ranking metrics and allows to specify the entire computing environ- ment as a virtual machine, providing an easy solution to repeat and reproduce a set of experiments. However, it does not support statistical testing. – LibRec-auto (version 0.1.5232) is an extension of LibRec that allows to automate experiments by adding a layer on top of that library, although it may also work with custom recommenders. Because of this, it does not support the candidate item filtering component and is limited by the data splitting capabilities pro- vided by LibRec; besides, it does not provide statistical testing. It handles the concept of study, which is a series of experiments executed with the same algo- rithm, dataset, and metrics. Being able to report these studies in configuration files should increase the reproducibility of the experiments performed with this framework. It has proved its flexibility in several works by e.g., Mansoury and Burke (2019) and Sonboli et al. (2020). – RiVal (version 0.233), presented in a previous work (Said and Bellogín 2014) as a framework oriented to the evaluation of external recommender systems. Its focus is on all the stages needed to evaluate an algorithm, not providing recommenda- tions, instead it provides wrappers to recommendation libraries. This framework supports all the previously presented components. However, RiVal has not been in active development since 2015; thus, the wrappers to external libraries are out- dated. Apart from that, it sets a good example of how a reproducible framework might be defined. For instance, the experiments are defined through configura- tion files which can be shared easily, and each of the modules (split, recommend, evaluate) are independent, as a result, it can be used to run all the stages or a selection of them. For instance, someone may use this framework with a given data split or a recommendation file generated in a different library. 32 https:// github. com/ that- recsys- lab/ librec- auto/ tree/0. 1. 52. 33 https:// github. com/ recom mende rs/ rival/ tree/ rival-0.2. 30 https:// github. com/ Amazi ngDD/ daisy Rec. 31 https:// github. com/ crowd rec/ idoma ar/ tree/ v4.0.0.

===== PAGE 24 =====
964 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 Based on this, we observe that those frameworks which naturally fit in the recom- mendation pipeline depicted in Fig. 1 make reproducibility easier and, as a conse- quence, the accountability of the generated experiments and of those research results obtained from them. In particular, we note that, to make those steps easier to inte- grate, each of the associated components should be able to communicate with the adjacent one. Many of the analyzed frameworks do this using plain text files, this allows making intermediate files publicly available. At the same time, this facilitates integrating algorithms implemented in virtually any programming language, as long as the language supports file-based input and output. In conclusion, we consider these toolkits very good approximations of a fair and transparent instantiation of the framework presented before. When used as a whole, they could improve the accountability of Recommender Systems research through the reproducibility of recommendation systems evaluation and their corresponding experimental settings. 5 Discussion, challenges, and limitations The previous section presented a series of reproducible frameworks that could fit under the proposed architecture for accountable experimentation in Recommender Systems. However, it is not clear how comparable these libraries are with each other. This particular aspect was analyzed in our previous work (Said and Bellogín 2014) using the RiVal toolkit. That work, denoted the set of internal, available evaluation strategies accessible within a recommendation framework (such as Mahout) as a framework-dependent evaluation protocol, based on the default, internal protocols implemented in each framework. In general, these strategies are not prone to provide accountable experimental environments, even though some sort of parameterization might be allowed. In contrast, the set of evaluation strategies that fulfill the require- ments presented in this work were called controlled evaluation protocol, where one has full control of every step of the protocol; i.e., a reproducible/accountable experi- mental framework is used—in that case, RiVal. To have a fresh answer on how com- parable two libraries may behave to each other, we now repeat those experiments with a different set of datasets and libraries (more information about them is pre- sented in Appendix); the results are presented in Tables 3 and 4. Based on the results shown in Table 3, a sharp difference between the two frame- works is noticeable in every dataset and with both recommendation algorithms. According to this, the most accurate framework of the two would be LensKit. One observation to note is that RankSys cannot produce a score for the Lastfm dataset. After investigating this, we identified this being due to how NDCG is computed in RankSys, in particular, how the gains are generated. The library takes the rating that appears in the test set for a user-item pair (if it does not appear, then that item is not relevant), subtracts the threshold, and uses the result of this operation incremented in one as the power of 2 that will be considered for the gain of a particular item in a specific ranking position. However, this dataset does not contain ratings but user listenings, hence, in some cases these gains were 299865 − 1 ≈ 1033000 , which is the reason for the undefined value returned by the RankSys evaluation protocol.

===== PAGE 25 =====
965 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… On the other hand, Table 4 shows the results for the controlled evaluation pro- tocol, where the algorithms from RankSys (either mf or ub) always outperform other when using the TrainItems candidate item strategy; however, when using the UserTest strategy, LensKit obtains better results (we refer to Appendix for the results using other datasets). These tables also show that, systematically, the performance values obtained with UserTest are higher than using TrainItems. This indicates that the UserTest candidate item strategy is modeling an easier (not realistic) task, where we know the user will rate something, and we want to opti- mize the ranking of those soon-to-be-rated items. Additionally, RankSys outper - forms LensKit when using TrainItems. This result is only obvious in controlled evaluation, due to the framework-dependent evaluation protocol disguising the comparison by comparing incompatible evaluation protocols. Given these widely differing results, it seems pertinent that in order to realistically perform an inter- framework benchmarking, the evaluation process needs to be defined and both the recommendation and evaluation steps must be performed in a more controlled and transparent environment. In the light of these results—which are in agreement with (Said and Bellogín 2014)—it stands clear that even though different frameworks implement the recom- mendation algorithms in a similar fashion, the results are not comparable, i.e., the performance of an algorithm implemented in one framework cannot be compared to the performance of the same algorithm in another. Not only do there seem to exist differences in how the recommendation algorithms are implemented, but also how the evaluation methods themselves are brought to life. There is no de facto under - standing on how (and on what) to evaluate a recommender algorithm. Coinciden- tally this also applies to how recommendation algorithms of a certain type should be realized (e.g., default parameter values and ad hoc implementations). This is not necessarily something negative. Yet, when it comes to performance comparison of recommender algorithms, a transparent and standardized (or controlled) evaluation is crucial. Without such, the relative performance of two or more algorithms evalu- ated under different conditions becomes largely meaningless. Hence, there is a clear limitation even when accountable frameworks are used: researchers are restricted to use the same framework for the entire set of experiments, or they risk them- selves on putting together results that are not comparable. In other words, in order to objectively and definitively characterize the performance of an algorithm, a con- trolled evaluation, with a defined evaluation protocol is a prerequisite. Additionally, given the large amount of recommender systems-related research being conducted, and the wide variety of established open-source frameworks, as well as individually implemented code, it is necessary to not only describe in detail the algorithms used, but also the complete evaluation process, including strategies for data splitting, specifics on the evaluation metrics and methods, etc. This is con- sistent with other works in the area that also advocate for the use of guidelines to assist researchers (Polatidis et al. 2019). Not only is this necessary in order to defini- tively show that one algorithm outperforms another—within the same framework— but also to increase understanding of the algorithms (and their implementations), and allow for objective progress. It is important to note that inter-framework com- parisons of recommendation quality can potentially point to incorrect results and

===== PAGE 26 =====
966 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 conclusions, unless performed with great caution and in a controlled, framework independent, environment. Simultaneously, there exist multiple other factors that make the evaluation of recommender systems very difficult, and at some points even flawed. Most recom- mender systems are used for the purpose of alleviating users in finding interesting information, this usually creates a bias in terms of popularity, i.e., the fact that some items are more popular than others creates synthetic similarities between users based solely on their interaction with popular items. If not taken into consideration, the evaluation of a recommender system can point to an algorithm performing signifi- cantly better than it would in a real-world situation simply due to the fact that it will recommend mostly popular items (Zhao et al. 2013), i.e., items that the user does not need to get recommended as there is a high probability that she already knows them. These biases that appear naturally create another challenge toward accountability and transparency, if, e.g., changes made to the dataset affecting these biases are not reported, or because a dataset might be more biased than another one (Dooms et al. 2016), make it impossible to obtain the same results. The important issue here would be that such biases (or other properties of the evaluation for that matter) are not well understood at the moment, and because of that, they are not properly acknowledged when designing the experiments nor when the settings are reported. In those cases, explanation-based approaches, such as Polatidis et al.’s (2020), could alleviate some of these issues, if the researcher needs to be assisted about the experimental settings, and if we restrict ourselves to use one library. It is also worth considering that, among different requirements proposed in Sect. 4, dataset collection and statistical testing are heavily understated in present frameworks, and little research has been devoted to these aspects. More specifically, reproducibility on how the datasets are created is more difficult if not enough Table 3 Performance results in terms of NDCG using the framework-dependent evaluation Algorithm Framework Lastfm Movielens 1M Yelp2013 mf LK 0.806 0.954 0.986 RS NaN 0.100 0.009 ub LK 0.417 0.956 0.075 RS NaN 0.060 0.008 Table 4 Performance results in Yelp2013 using the controlled evaluation protocol Algorithm Framework Candidate item TrainItems UserTest P@10 R@10 NDCG@10 P@10 R@10 NDCG@10 mf LK 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.086 0.979 0.896 RS 0.004 0.049 0.029 0.074 0.975 0.882 ub LK 0.000 0.001 0.001 0.155 0.906 0.825 RS 0.006 0.060 0.036 0.082 0.784 0.709

===== PAGE 27 =====
967 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… data are presented, such as the cleaning process, whether anonymization is applied, etc. (see Dooms et al. 2016). On the other hand, reproducibility in statistical test- ing is necessary if we expect the reported results to be statistically significant, while ensuring some level of accountability and transparency in the process. For instance, there exist different ways to take samples for a test when doing cross-validation, in some cases, violating independence assumptions or evidencing flaws in the design (Bouckaert 2003). As an example, in the Information Retrieval community there are studies about the extent of reporting statistical significance tests (Carterette 2017); however, in Recommender Systems no such analyses have been made. In summary, the issues of replication—obtaining the exact same results in the same setting—and reproducibility—obtaining comparable results using a different setting—are very difficult challenges at the moment, related to the issue of produc- ing accountable Recommender Systems. They force researchers to reimplement the baseline algorithms to compare their approach against, or to pay extra attention to every algorithmic and evaluation detail, ignoring if the observed discrepancies with respect to what was already published come from omitted details from the origi- nal papers (parameters, methodologies, protocols, etc.) or a wrong interpretation of any of these intermediate steps. However, as already mentioned, this is an evolving scenario and has become a very active topic in Recommender Systems and related communities. In particular, there have been recent advances on how to improve reproducibility, by, e.g., Carterette and Sabhnani (2015) and Di Buccio et al. (2015). In these works, different aspects are considered for this goal; for instance, Di Buccio et al. (2015) propose to build a taxonomy of components of a (Information Retrieval) system in such a way that each component can be implemented as part of a pipeline. Then, the performance of various pipelines can be measured and the effect of any of these components unequivocally gauged. Carterette and Sabhnani’s work (Carterette and Sabhnani 2015) provides a more theoretical solution by considering the raw out- comes of the experiments, observing that a low variance on the statistical analyses between systems is an indication of high reproducibility. There are, nonetheless, other challenges raised by researchers from other commu- nities. Bajpai et al. (2017) shift the attention to the reviewing stage, where double- blind review hinders reproducibility. The work suggests, as a possible solution or potential motivation, to highlight reproducible papers, for instance, by spreading the use of badges such as the ones from ACM mentioned in Sect. 3.2. From a more practical perspective, Ferro (2017) focuses on three aspects: the system runs (i.e., the execution of the algorithms), experimental collections (the actual dataset used, together with the ground truth data, and any other external information that may be needed), and meta-evaluation studies. The work considers these dimensions key to ensure reproducibility, but no perfect solution exists for any of them, because of that, it calls for an orchestrated effort and a cultural change. Under a more global, gen- eral viewpoint, Freire et al. (2016) provide a list of open research challenges, includ- ing the fact that making a paper reproducible requires to change the behavior of sci- entists when doing research and communicating with others. Can this be done in an efficient way? Is there a long term impact for the researcher? If that was the case, the work argues that more researchers would be convinced on spending time mak - ing their work reproducible. Another challenge mentioned in this list is the need to

===== PAGE 28 =====
968 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 create research environments to enable reproducibility. Related to the reproduc- ibility as a process mentioned before, Lin and Zhang (2020) argue that the resources used in a paper should be available (archived) for a long time, so we should provide infrastructures for this. Last, but not least, it is important to consider the cost of making something reproducible/replicable and of the associated documentation; in particular, the difficulties for newcomers should be taken into account if a commu- nity wants to lower the barrier and adopt general reproducibility guidelines. To finish this section we want to highlight one important limitation of this work. In the context of Recommender Systems research—as in general AI—, different stakeholders exist. For example, the authors from (Charisi et al. 2017) identify four groups of stakeholders for an ethical AI system: users, regulators, ethicists/lawyers, and society at large. In this work we only explore accountability for one of them: the consumer of the published research work. We have analyzed and instantiated several challenges, suggestions, and guidelines in the Recommender Systems research field, while focusing on the reader of such research. We consider the cases where the final user (i.e., the person using the recommender system) or the designer/developer are the ones requesting accountability outside of the context of this work. Those situations pose other problems that are different (although there might be some over- lap) from those presented here. As discussed by Diakopoulos (2016), when dealing with algorithmic decision-making, every algorithm is different and must be under - stood in its context to determine what can be disclosed; this may be a technical pro- cess as well as a human-centered one. In our scenario, because of the very nature of the Recommender Systems field, such process will probably need both. Hence, as a community, we must develop a methodology of information-disclosure modeling that includes thinking about how the public would use any particular bit of informa- tion disclosed, combined with explicit strategies oriented to each of the stakeholders present in typical Recommender Systems. 6 Conclusions and future directions Reproducibility in the Recommender Systems area is a topic that has gained traction in recent years. It has, de facto, been equated to the reproducibility of the algorithms involved in the experiments of the published papers; however, as we have presented, this is far from the truth. In this paper, we address exactly this problem by providing a concrete definition of the problem and a proposal for a reproducible framework ori- ented to Recommender Systems research; as a consequence, we understand it would help to solve the issue for much of research published nowadays. For this, we have presented several issues collected while developing recommendation algorithms and, specifically, when evaluating recommender systems. Based on these issues, we have proposed a reproducible framework based on several stages that seeks, from the view- point of the recommender system practitioner or researcher, to rethink the whole rec- ommendation pipeline in order to facilitate that works following this framework gain reproducibility and be easier to replicate. In particular, we have specified the following tasks in this pipeline: dataset collection, data splitting, recommendation, candidate item

===== PAGE 29 =====
969 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… filtering, evaluation computation, and statistical testing. We also present and discuss a list of experimental libraries that, to some degree, fit such a framework. We argue that, as a consequence, once we are capable of making reproducible research, we get accountable recommender systems. We do this by presenting an exten- sive survey of the concepts, not only limited to the Recommender Systems commu- nity, but related to the broader field of algorithmic accountability. As a positive aspect, we believe this equivalence should attract even more efforts from the community into improving reproducibility of the recommendation algorithms, as they will have a direct effect in producing more transparent and accountable Recommender Systems research. For instance, many of the current proposals contributed in the broader areas of com- putational research could (and should) be adapted and translated for recommendation (Stodden et al. 2016). However, the presented research has some limitations that should be addressed in the near future. We would like to understand the source of the discrepancies observed between internal and external evaluation results once a reproducible framework is used. On top of that, there is another problem that has not been addressed: how compara- ble are different reproducible frameworks? While most of the works have focused on comparing published papers under a common framework, the use of more than one framework has not been considered, probably because the number of such frameworks is still very low. Ideally, these frameworks should formalize a set of standardized evaluation method- ologies, independent of specific recommendation algorithms or evaluation strategies. These methodologies shall remain transparent to the practitioners to help them address current policies on algorithmic accountability and transparency (Koene et al. 2019). At the moment, theoretical works on specific components of the presented pipeline (i.e., the candidate item filtering one) have demonstrated that many works of research are not comparable, because the evaluation metrics computed on the strategies reported are not stable (Krichene and Rendle 2020; Li et al. 2020). This is a critical point deserv - ing further attention, since it limits the validity of the results being published: even if we are able to perfectly reproduce the research work (because the author shared all the information, code, etc.), the results will be flawed. Additionally, all the reproducible frameworks analyzed are completely focused on accuracy metrics. This is derived by the common scenario in the area where only those types of metrics are reported and optimized for. However, in the last years, beyond- accuracy metrics such as diversity, novelty, or serendipity are considered more, or at least as, important than accuracy. Because of that, in the future we aim to extend this proposal to other evaluation dimensions along with considering other contextual dimensions—like time and social networks—in the evaluation protocols, and also con- sider approaches to deal with statistical biases in the evaluation (Bellogín et al. 2017). Acknowledgements This work has been funded by the Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Universi- dades (reference: PID2019-108965GB-I00). The authors thank the reviewers for their thoughtful com- ments and suggestions. Funding Open Access funding provided thanks to the CRUE-CSIC agreement with Springer Nature.

===== PAGE 30 =====
970 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 Appendix Experimental settings Datasets. In this work, we use three datasets from different domains to evidence reproducibility problems that might arise when evaluating recommender systems. The three tested domains are movies (Movielens 1M 34), music (Lastfm35), and user reviews of business venues (Yelp 36). Two of these datasets contain users’ prefer - ences on items expressed as ratings on a 1–5 star scale (Movielens and Yelp), whereas one of them includes preferences as the (unbounded) number of interac- tions (artist listenings, in this case) between the users and the items. Even though not all the evaluated frameworks explicitly support implicit or log-based data such as the last one, we decided to include it as a further test on how these types of data- sets are processed. More specifically, the first dataset we use is Lastfm, which contains around 100,000 ratings from 1,892 users on 17,632 artists. The second dataset, Movielens 1M, with 1 million ratings from 6,040 users on 3,706 items. Finally, the Yelp2013 dataset, which apart from reviews also contains 229,907 ratings by 45,981 users on 11,537 businesses. The datasets additionally contain item meta data—e.g., movie titles, business descriptions, etc.—these data were not used in the scope of this work. A summary of their statistics is shown in Table 5. Recommendation frameworks. In this paper, we focus our analysis on two pop- ular recommendation libraries still in active development: LensKit and RankSys. As stated in the introduction, both MyMediaLite and Mahout are not active at the moment and their use has decreased gradually. For a comparison between MyMedi- aLite, Mahout, and LensKit we refer the reader to Said and Bellogín (2014). Algorithms. In order to provide a comparison between the recommendation frameworks, we select two of the most common families of collaborative filtering algorithms: nearest neighbors and matrix factorization techniques. Specifically, we test a user-based nearest neighbor algorithm using a size of 50 for the neighborhood and the Cosine similarity (denoted as ub) and a matrix factorization technique with 34 Available at http:// group lens. org/ datas ets/ movie lens/. 35 Available at https:// group lens. org/ datas ets/ hetrec- 2011/. 36 Available at http:// www. kaggle. com/c/ yelp- recsys- 2013/ data. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com- mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.

===== PAGE 31 =====
971 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… 50 factors (denoted as mf). For a comparison involving more algorithms, such as item-based nearest neighbor, see (Said and Bellogín 2014). More specifically, we use the UserUserItemScorer recommendation algorithm with the CosineVectorSimilarity similarity in LensKit for ub, whereas in RankSys we use the UserNeighborhoodRecommender with Vec- torCosineUserSimilarity. For the mf algorithm, we use FunkSVDItem - Scorer in LensKit and MFRecommender with HKVFactorizer as factorizer in RankSys. Complete results for controlled evaluation protocol We configured RiVal to use a random partition where a global ratio of 80-20 is used to split the dataset into training and test; we decided to not check other splitting strategies based on our earlier findings (Said and Bellogín 2014) showing that the rest of strategies do not have a strong impact on the final performance. We used the algorithms described in the previous section and report RiVal’s implementation of precision (P), recall (R), and normalized discounted cumulative gain (NDCG) at ranking position 10, with a relevance threshold of 5. The discounting function for NDCG is the exponential. Tables 6 and 7 (together with Table 4, already presented in the main text of the manuscript) show the performance results in Lastfm, Movielens 1M, and Yelp, respectively, when the controlled evaluation is used. We observe an interesting pat- tern from these results: the algorithms from RankSys (either mf or ub) are always the best ones according to the TrainItems candidate item strategy; however, when using the UserTest strategy, LensKit tends to obtain better results (except for Lastfm dataset). This situation evidences one of the most critical aspects among different stages in the proposed framework: the candidate item selection strategy affects heav- ily the final results, not only in terms of the metric value but also on the order of the recommendation algorithms. This result is in line with our previous work (Said and Bellogín 2014) and also previous research on evaluation methodologies (Bellogín et al. 2011). These tables also show that, systematically, the performance values obtained with UserTest are higher than using TrainItems. This indeed indicates that the UserT - est candidate item strategy is modeling an easier (not very realistic) task, where we know the user will rate something and we want to optimize the ranking of those soon-to-be-rated items. In fact, we observe that under these assumptions, the Table 5 Statistics of the three datasets used in the experiments Dataset Users Items Ratings Density Timespan Lastfm 1,892 17,632 92,834 0.28% 2005-2011 Movielens 1M 6,040 3,706 1,000,000 4.47% 2000-2003 Yelp2013 45,981 11,537 229,907 0.04% 2005-2013

===== PAGE 32 =====
972 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 user-based algorithm is almost (and often better) as good as the mf, a counterintui- tive result that does not match the general knowledge in the community. A further observation to be made is how this controlled evaluation compares to each framework’s internal evaluation protocol. By looking at the absolute numbers, we may infer that RankSys is internally using a candidate item selection very simi- lar to the TrainItems, whereas LensKit is likely using UserTest or something very similar. This observation emphasizes the unfairness one may incur if we directly compare the values presented in Table 3, or, in general, if we want to compare two sets of results generated by different researchers or practitioners. References Abdul, A.M., Vermeulen, J., Wang, D., Lim, B.Y., Kankanhalli, M.S.: Trends and trajectories for explain- able, accountable and intelligible systems: An HCI research agenda. In: Mandryk, R.L., Hancock, M., Perry, M., Cox, A.L. (eds.) Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2018, Montreal, QC, Canada, April 21–26, 2018, p. 582. ACM (2018) Abel, F., Deldjoo, Y., Elahi, M., Kohlsdorf, D.: Recsys challenge 2017: Offline and online evaluation. In: Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’17, pp. 372– 373. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2017) Arguello, J., Crane, M., Diaz, F., Lin, J.J., Trotman, A.: Report on the SIGIR 2015 workshop on repro- ducibility, inexplicability, and generalizability of results (RIGOR). SIGIR Forum 49(2), 107–116 (2015) Armstrong, T.G., Moffat, A., Webber, W., Zobel, J.: Improvements that don’t add up: Ad-hoc retrieval results since 1998. In: Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM ’09, pp. 601–610. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2009) Table 6 Performance results in Lastfm using the controlled evaluation protocol Algorithm Framework Candidate item TrainItems UserTest P@10 R@10 NDCG@10 P@10 R@10 NDCG@10 mf LK 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 RS 0.007 0.015 0.000 0.469 0.874 0.809 ub LK 0.001 0.002 0.000 0.495 0.796 0.711 RS 0.023 0.045 0.004 0.472 0.746 0.626 Table 7 Performance results in Movielens 1M using the controlled evaluation protocol Algorithm Framework Candidate item TrainItems UserTest P@10 R@10 NDCG@10 P@10 R@10 NDCG@10 mf LK 0.047 0.056 0.064 0.384 0.699 0.663 RS 0.169 0.297 0.300 0.335 0.668 0.625 ub LK 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.393 0.708 0.681 RS 0.106 0.168 0.172 0.323 0.655 0.612

===== PAGE 33 =====
973 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… Baeza-Yates, R.A., Ribeiro-Neto, B.A.: Modern Information Retrieval: The Concepts and Technology Behind Search, 2nd edn. Pearson Education Ltd., Harlow, England (2011) Bajpai, V., Kühlewind, M., Ott, J., Schönwälder, J., Sperotto, A., Trammell, B.: Challenges with repro- ducibility. In: Proceedings of the Reproducibility Workshop, Reproducibility@SIGCOMM 2017, Los Angeles, CA, USA, August 25, 2017, pp. 1–4. ACM (2017) Basu, C., Hirsh, H., Cohen, W.W.: Recommendation as classification: Using social and content-based information in recommendation. In: Mostow, J., Rich, C. (eds.) AAAI/IAAI, pp. 714–720. AAAI Press/The MIT Press (1998) Bellogín, A., Castells, P., Cantador, I.: Precision-oriented evaluation of recommender systems: An algo- rithmic comparison. In: Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, Rec- Sys ’11, pp. 333–336. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2011) Bellogín, A., Castells, P., Said, A., Tikk, D.: Workshop on reproducibility and replication in recom- mender systems evaluation: Repsys. In: Proceedings of the 7th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’13, pp. 485–486. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2013) Bellogín, A., Cantador, I., Díez, F., Castells, P., Chavarriaga, E.: An empirical comparison of social, col- laborative filtering, and hybrid recommenders. ACM TIST 4(1), 14:1-14:29 (2013) Bellogín, A., Castells, P., Cantador, I.: Statistical biases in information retrieval metrics for recommender systems. Inf. Retr. J. 20(6), 606–634 (2017) Bennett, J., Lanning, S., Netflix, N.: The netflix prize. In: In KDD Cup and Workshop in conjunction with KDD (2007) Bouckaert, R.R.: Choosing between two learning algorithms based on calibrated tests. In: Fawcett, T., Mishra, N. (eds.) Machine Learning, Proceedings of the Twentieth International Conference (ICML 2003), August 21–24, 2003, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 51–58. AAAI Press (2003) Breese, J., Heckerman, D., Kadie, C.: Empirical analysis of predictive algorithms for collaborative filter - ing. In: Proceedings of the Fourteenth Conference Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI-98), pp. 43–52. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA (1998) Breuer, T., Ferro, N., Fuhr, N., Maistro, M., Sakai, T., Schaer, P., Soboroff, I.: How to measure the repro- ducibility of system-oriented IR experiments. In: Huang, J., Chang, Y., Cheng, X., Kamps, J., Mur - dock, V., Wen, J., Liu, Y. (eds.) Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR 2020, Virtual Event, China, July 25–30, 2020, pp. 349–358. ACM (2020) Brinckman, A., Chard, K., Gaffney, N., Hategan, M., Jones, M.B., Kowalik, K., Kulasekaran, S., Ludäscher, B., Mecum, B.D., Nabrzyski, J., Stodden, V., Taylor, I.J., Turk, M.J., Turner, K.: Com- puting environments for reproducibility: capturing the whole tale. Fut. Gener. Comput. Syst. 94, 854–867 (2019) Campos, P.G., Díez, F., Cantador, I.: Time-aware recommender systems: a comprehensive survey and analysis of existing evaluation protocols. User Model. User Adapt. Interact. 24(1–2), 67–119 (2014) Carterette, B., Sabhnani, K.: Using simulation to analyze the potential for reproducibility. In: Proceedings of the SIGIR Workshop on Reproducibility, Inexplicability, and Generalizability of Results (RIGOR 2015) (2015) Carterette, B.: But is it statistically significant?: Statistical significance in IR research, 1995–2014. In: Kando, N., Sakai, T., Joho, H., Li, H., de Vries, A.P., White, R.W. (eds.) Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, August 7–11, 2017, pp. 1125–1128. ACM (2017) Charisi, V., Dennis, L.A., Fisher, M., Lieck, R., Matthias, A., Slavkovik, M., Sombetzki, J., Winfield, A.F.T., Yampolskiy, R.: Towards moral autonomous systems. CoRR arXiv: abs/ 1703. 04741 (2017) Collberg, C.S., Proebsting, T.A.: Repeatability in computer systems research. Commun. ACM 59(3), 62–69 (2016) Cremonesi, P., Koren, Y., Turrin, R.: Performance of recommender algorithms on top-n recommendation tasks. In: Proceedings of the Fourth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’10, pp. 39–46. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2010) Desrosiers, C., Karypis, G.: A comprehensive survey of neighborhood-based recommendation methods. In: Ricci, F., Rokach, L., Shapira, B., Kantor, P.B. (eds.) Recommender Systems Handbook, pp. 107–144. Springer, New York (2011) Di Buccio, E., Di Nunzio, G.M., Ferro, N., Harman, D., Maistro, M., Silvello, G.: Unfolding off-the-shelf IR systems for reproducibility. In: Proceedings of the SIGIR Workshop on Reproducibility, Inexpli- cability, and Generalizability of Results (RIGOR 2015) (2015)

===== PAGE 34 =====
974 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 Diakopoulos, N.: Accountability in algorithmic decision making. Commun. ACM 59(2), 56–62 (2016) Dooms, S., De Pessemier, T., Martens, L.: Movietweetings: a movie rating dataset collected from twitter. In: Workshop on Crowdsourcing and Human Computation for Recommender Systems, CrowdRec at RecSys 2013 (2013) Dooms, S., Bellogín, A., Pessemier, T.D., Martens, L.: A framework for dataset benchmarking and its application to a new movie rating dataset. ACM TIST 7(3), 41:1-41:28 (2016) Dragicevic, P., Jansen, Y., Sarma, A., Kay, M., Chevalier, F.: Increasing the transparency of research papers with explorable multiverse analyses. In: Brewster, S.A., Fitzpatrick, G., Cox, A.L., Kostakos, V. (eds.) Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK, May 04–09, 2019, p. 65. ACM (2019) Ekstrand, M.D., Kluver, D., Harper, F.M., Konstan, J.A.: Letting users choose recommender algorithms: An experimental study. In: Werthner, H., Zanker, M., Golbeck, J., Semeraro, G. (eds.) Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys 2015, Vienna, Austria, September 16–20, 2015, pp. 11–18. ACM (2015) Ekstrand, M.D., Ludwig, M., Konstan, J.A., Riedl, J.T.: Rethinking the recommender research ecosys- tem: Reproducibility, openness, and lenskit. In: Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference on Rec- ommender Systems, RecSys ’11, pp. 133–140. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2011) Ferrari Dacrema, M., Cremonesi, P., Jannach, D.: Are we really making much progress? a worrying anal- ysis of recent neural recommendation approaches. In: Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys 2019) (2019). Source: https:// github. com/ Mauri zioFD/ RecSy s2019_ DeepL earni ng_ Evalu ation Ferro, N.: Reproducibility challenges in information retrieval evaluation. ACM J. Data Inf. Qual. 8(2), 8:1-8:4 (2017) Ferro, N., Fuhr, N., Grefenstette, G., Konstan, J.A., Castells, P., Daly, E.M., Declerck, T., Ekstrand, M.D., Geyer, W., Gonzalo, J., Kuflik, T., Lindén, K., Magnini, B., Nie, J., Perego, R., Shapira, B., Sob- oroff, I., Tintarev, N., Verspoor, K., Willemsen, M.C., Zobel, J.: From evaluating to forecasting per- formance: How to turn information retrieval, natural language processing and recommender systems into predictive sciences (dagstuhl perspectives workshop 17442). Dagstuhl Manifestos 7(1), 96–139 (2018) Ferro, N., Fuhr, N., Rauber, A.: Introduction to the special issue on reproducibility in information retrieval: evaluation campaigns, collections, and analyses. ACM J. Data Inf. Qual. 10(3), 9:1-9:4 (2018) Ferro, N., Fuhr, N., Rauber, A.: Introduction to the special issue on reproducibility in information retrieval: tools and infrastructures. ACM J. Data Inf. Qual. 10(4), 14:1-14:4 (2018) Freire, J., Fuhr, N., Rauber, A.: Reproducibility of data-oriented experiments in e-science (dagstuhl semi- nar 16041). Dagstuhl Rep. 6(1), 108–159 (2016) Gantner, Z., Rendle, S., Freudenthaler, C., Schmidt-Thieme, L.: Mymedialite: A free recommender sys- tem library. In: Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’11, pp. 305–308. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2011) Gebru, T., Morgenstern, J., Vecchione, B., Vaughan, J.W., Wallach, H.M., III, H.D., Crawford, K.: Data- sheets for datasets. CoRR arXiv: abs/ 1803. 09010 (2018) Goldberg, D., Nichols, D.A., Oki, B.M., Terry, D.B.: Using collaborative filtering to weave an informa- tion tapestry. Commun. ACM 35(12), 61–70 (1992) Goldberg, K., Roeder, T., Gupta, D., Perkins, C.: Eigentaste: a constant time collaborative filtering algo- rithm. Inf. Retr. 4(2), 133–151 (2001) Gunawardana, A., Shani, G.: A survey of accuracy evaluation metrics of recommendation tasks. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 10, 2935–2962 (2009) Guo, G., Zhang, J., Sun, Z., Yorke-Smith, N.: Librec: A java library for recommender systems. In: Cri- stea, A.I., Masthoff, J., Said, A., Tintarev, N. (eds.) Posters, Demos, Late-breaking Results and Workshop Proceedings of the 23rd Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization (UMAP 2015), Dublin, Ireland, June 29–July 3, 2015, CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 1388. CEUR-WS.org (2015) Herlocker, J.L., Konstan, J.A., Terveen, L.G., Riedl, J.T.: Evaluating collaborative filtering recommender systems. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 22(1), 5–53 (2004) Ivie, P., Thain, D.: Reproducibility in scientific computing. ACM Comput. Surv. 51(3), 63:1-63:36 (2018) Jambor, T., Wang, J.: Goal-driven collaborative filtering: a directional error based approach. In: Proceed- ings of the 32Nd European Conference on Advances in Information Retrieval, ECIR’2010, pp. 407– 419. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2010a)

===== PAGE 35 =====
975 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… Jambor, T., Wang, J.: Optimizing multiple objectives in collaborative filtering. In: Proceedings of the Fourth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’10, pp. 55–62. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2010b) Järvelin, K., Kekäläinen, J.: Cumulated gain-based evaluation of IR techniques. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 20(4), 422–446 (2002) Jobin, A., Ienca, M., Vayena, E.: Artificial intelligence: the global landscape of ethics guidelines. CoRR abs/1906.11668 (2019) Kamphuis, C., de Vries, A.P., Boytsov, L., Lin, J.: Which BM25 do you mean? A large-scale reproduc- ibility study of scoring variants. In: Jose, J.M., Yilmaz, E., Magalhães, J., Castells, P., Ferro, N., Silva, M.J., Martins, F. (eds.) Advances in Information Retrieval: 42nd European Conference on IR Research, ECIR 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, April 14–17, 2020, Proceedings, Part II, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 12036, pp. 28–34. Springer (2020) Kluver, D., Konstan, J.A.: Evaluating recommender behavior for new users. In: Kobsa, A., Zhou, M.X., Ester, M., Koren, Y. (eds.) Eighth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’14, Foster City, Silicon Valley, CA, USA; October 06–10, 2014, pp. 121–128. ACM (2014) Koene, A., Clifton, C., Hatada, Y., Webb, H., Patel, M., Machado, C., LaViolette, J., Richardson, R., Reisman, D.: A governance framework for algorithmic accountability and transparency. http:// www. europ arl. europa. eu/ think tank/ en/ docum ent. html? refer ence= EPRS_ STU(2019) 624262 (retrieved August, 2019) (2019) Konstan, J.A., Adomavicius, G.: Toward identification and adoption of best practices in algorithmic rec- ommender systems research. In: Bellogín, A., Castells, P., Said, A., Tikk, D. (eds.) Proceedings of the International Workshop on Reproducibility and Replication in Recommender Systems Evalua- tion, RepSys 2013, Hong Kong, China, October 12, 2013, pp. 23–28. ACM (2013) Kosir, A., Odic, A., Tkalcic, M.: How to improve the statistical power of the 10-fold cross validation scheme in recommender systems. In: Bellogín, A., Castells, P., Said, A., Tikk, D. (eds.) Proceedings of the International Workshop on Reproducibility and Replication in Recommender Systems Evalu- ation, RepSys 2013, Hong Kong, China, October 12, 2013, pp. 3–6. ACM (2013) Kowald, D., Schedl, M., Lex, E.: The unfairness of popularity bias in music recommendation: A repro- ducibility study. In: Jose, J.M., Yilmaz, E., Magalhães, J., Castells, P., Ferro, N., Silva, M.J., Mar - tins, F. (eds.) Advances in Information Retrieval - 42nd European Conference on IR Research, ECIR 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, April 14–17, 2020, Proceedings, Part II, Lecture Notes in Computer Sci- ence, vol. 12036, pp. 35–42. Springer (2020) Krebs, L.M., Rodriguez, O.L.A., Dewitte, P., Ausloos, J., Geerts, D., Naudts, L., Verbert, K.: Tell me what you know: GDPR implications on designing transparency and accountability for news rec- ommender systems. In: Mandryk, R.L., Brewster, S.A., Hancock, M., Fitzpatrick, G., Cox, A.L., Kostakos, V., Perry, M. (eds.) Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK, May 04–09, 2019. ACM (2019) Krichene, W., Rendle, S.: On sampled metrics for item recommendation. In: Gupta, R., Liu, Y., Tang, J., Prakash, B.A. (eds.) KDD ’20: The 26th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Virtual Event, CA, USA, August 23–27, 2020, pp. 1748–1757. ACM (2020) Lepri, B., Oliver, N., Letouzé, E., Pentland, A., Vinck, P.: Fair, transparent, and accountable algorithmic decision-making processes. Philos. Technol. 31(4), 611–627 (2018) Li, D., Jin, R., Gao, J., Liu, Z.: On sampling top-k recommendation evaluation. In: Gupta, R., Liu, Y., Tang, J., Prakash, B.A. (eds.) KDD ’20: The 26th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Dis- covery and Data Mining, Virtual Event, CA, USA, August 23–27, 2020, pp. 2114–2124. ACM (2020) Lin, J., Zhang, Q.: Reproducibility is a process, not an achievement: The replicability of IR reproduc- ibility experiments. In: Jose, J.M., Yilmaz, E., Magalhães, J., Castells, P., Ferro, N., Silva, M.J., Martins, F. (eds.) Advances in Information Retrieval - 42nd European Conference on IR Research, ECIR 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, April 14–17, 2020, Proceedings, Part II, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 12036, pp. 43–49. Springer (2020) Mansoury, M., Burke, R.: Algorithm selection with librec-auto. In: Beel, J., Kotthoff, L. (eds.) Proceed- ings of the 1st Interdisciplinary Workshop on Algorithm Selection and Meta-Learning in Informa- tion Retrieval co-located with the 41st European Conference on Information Retrieval (ECIR 2019), Cologne, Germany, April 14, 2019, CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 2360, pp. 11–17. CEUR- WS.org (2019)

===== PAGE 36 =====
976 A. Bellogín, A. Said 1 3 Mesas, R.M., Bellogín, A.: Evaluating decision-aware recommender systems. In: Cremonesi, P., Ricci, F., Berkovsky, S., Tuzhilin, A. (eds.) Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys 2017, Como, Italy, August 27–31, 2017, pp. 74–78. ACM (2017) Olteanu, A., Kiciman, E., Castillo, C.: A critical review of online social data: Biases, methodological pit- falls, and ethical boundaries. In: Chang, Y., Zhai, C., Liu, Y., Maarek, Y. (eds.) Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, WSDM 2018, Marina Del Rey, CA, USA, February 5–9, 2018, pp. 785–786. ACM (2018) Owen, S., Anil, R., Dunning, T., Friedman, E.: Mahout in Action. Manning Publications Co., Greenwich, CT, USA (2011) Plesser, H.E.: Reproducibility vs. replicability: a brief history of a confused terminology. Front. Neuroin- form. 11, 76 (2017) Polatidis, N., Pimenidis, E., Fish, A., Kapetanakis, S.: A guideline-based approach for assisting with the reproducibility of experiments in recommender systems evaluation. Int. J. Artif. Intell. Tools 28(8), 1960011:1 (2019) Polatidis, N., Papaleonidas, A., Pimenidis, E., Iliadis, L.: An explanation-based approach for experiment reproducibility in recommender systems. Neural Comput. Appl. 32(16), 12259–12266 (2020) Proceedings of the Reproducibility Workshop, Reproducibility@SIGCOMM 2017, Los Angeles, CA, USA, August 25, 2017. ACM (2017) Raji, I.D., Smart, A., White, R.N., Mitchell, M., Gebru, T., Hutchinson, B., Smith-Loud, J., Theron, D., Barnes, P.: Closing the AI accountability gap: defining an end-to-end framework for internal algo- rithmic auditing. In: Hildebrandt, M., Castillo, C., Celis, E., Ruggieri, S., Taylor, L., Zanfir-Fortuna, G. (eds.) FAT* ’20: Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, Barcelona, Spain, January 27–30, 2020, pp. 33–44. ACM (2020). https:// doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 33510 95. 33728 73 Said, A., Bellogín, A.: Comparative recommender system evaluation: Benchmarking recommendation frameworks. In: Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’14, pp. 129–136. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2014) Said, A., Bellogín, A.: Replicable evaluation of recommender systems. In: Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’15, pp. 363–364. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2015) Said, A., Tikk, D., Cremonesi, P.: Benchmarking: A methodology for ensuring the relative quality of a recommendation system for software engineering. In: Robillard, M., Maalej, W., Walker, R., Zim- mermann, T. (eds.) Recommendation Systems in Software Engineering, chap. 11, pp. 275–300. Springer (2014) Sakai, T.: Statistical reform in information retrieval? SIGIR Forum 48(1), 3–12 (2014) Sarwar, B., Karypis, G., Konstan, J., Riedl, J.: Item-based collaborative filtering recommendation algo- rithms. In: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’01, pp. 285–295. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2001) Shani, G., Gunawardana, A.: Evaluating recommendation systems. In: Ricci, F., Rokach, L., Shapira, B., Kantor, P.B. (eds.) Recommender Systems Handbook, pp. 257–297. Springer, New York (2011) Shin, D., Park, Y.J.: Role of fairness, accountability, and transparency in algorithmic affordance. Comput. Hum. Behav. 98, 277–284 (2019) Sonboli, N., Burke, R., Liu, Z., Mansoury, M.: Fairness-aware recommendation with librec-auto. In: San- tos, R.L.T., Marinho, L.B., Daly, E.M., Chen, L., Falk, K., Koenigstein, N., de Moura, E.S. (eds.) RecSys 2020: Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, Virtual Event, Brazil, Sep- tember 22–26, 2020, pp. 594–596. ACM (2020) Stodden, V., McNutt, M., Bailey, D.H., Deelman, E., Gil, Y., Hanson, B., Heroux, M.A., Ioannidis, J.P., Taufer, M.: Enhancing reproducibility for computational methods. Science 354(6317), 1240–1241 (2016) Sun, Z., Yu, D., Fang, H., Yang, J., Qu, X., Zhang, J., Geng, C.: Are we evaluating rigorously? bench- marking recommendation for reproducible evaluation and fair comparison. In: Santos, R.L.T., Marinho, L.B., Daly, E.M., Chen, L., Falk, K., Koenigstein, N., de Moura, E.S. (eds.) RecSys 2020: Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, Virtual Event, Brazil, September 22–26, 2020, pp. 23–32. ACM (2020) Vargas, S.: Novelty and diversity evaluation and enhancement in recommender systems. Ph.D. thesis, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (2015) Wang, J., de Vries, A.P., Reinders, M.J.T.: Unified relevance models for rating prediction in collaborative filtering. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 26(3), 16:1-16:42 (2008)

===== PAGE 37 =====
977 1 3 Improving accountability in recommender systems research… Zhao, X., Niu, Z., Chen, W.: Opinion-based collaborative filtering to solve popularity bias in recom- mender systems. In: Decker, H., Lhotská, L., Link, S., Basl, J., Tjoa, A.M. (eds.) Database and Expert Systems Applications: 24th International Conference, DEXA 2013, Prague, Czech Repub- lic, August 26–29, 2013. Proceedings, Part II, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8056, pp. 426–433. Springer (2013) Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Alejandro Bellogín is Associate Professor at Universidad Autonoma de Madrid (UAM), Spain. Previ- ously, he worked with Prof. Arjen de Vries associated to the Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica under a post-doctoral Marie Curie research grant. In 2012, he completed his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Pablo Castells and Dr. Iván Cantador at UAM. Dr. Bellogín has worked in several areas of user modeling and personalization, including recommender systems, evaluation, and reproducibility, where he has pub- lished over 80 conference and journal papers, while being involved as program or organization commit- tees in venues related to these areas, such as RecSys, WWW and UMAP, among others. Alan Said is Associate Professor at University of Gothenburg. He holds a PhD from Technische Univer - sität Berlin. Prior to joining the University of Gothenburg, Alan held positions in industry and academia. He was lecturer at University of Skövde (2016–2019), machine learning engineer 2014–2016 working on application of state of the art machine learning in a large scale production setting at Recorded Future. He was Senior Researcher (2014) working on recommender systems and evaluation in the Multimedia Com- puting research group at Delft University of Technology. He was awarded an MSCA Alain Bensoussan ERCIM Fellowship at Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (2013–2014) for work on evaluation of recom- mender and personalization systems. Alan’s research spans the fields of user modeling, personalization, recommender systems, evaluation, and reproducibility. He has worked in these fields in various national and international projects as researcher, leader, manager, PI, and proposal writer. He has published over 70 scientific works in top journals, conferences, workshops, and books. He has been nominated for and awarded several Best Paper and Poster awards for his research. Alan frequently serves on Program and Organization committees of top venues and journals such as ACM RecSys, WWW, ACM CIKM, ACM UMAP, ACM IUI, UMUAI, etc.

===== PAGE 38 =====
© The Author(s) 2021. This work is published under http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ (the “License”). Notwithstanding the ProQuest Terms and Conditions, you may use this content in accordance with the terms of the License.
