
===== PAGE 1 =====
. . Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3434185 . . RESEARCH-ARTICLE A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research MAURIZIO FERRARI DACREMA, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, MI, Italy . SIMONE BOGLIO, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, MI, Italy . PAOLO CREMONESI, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, MI, Italy . DIETMAR JANNACH, Alpen-Adria-Universität Klagenfurt, Klagenfurt, Carinthia, Austria . . . Open Access Support provided by: . Alpen-Adria-Universität Klagenfurt . Politecnico di Milano . PDF Download 3434185.pdf 12 March 2026 Total Citations: 160 Total Downloads: 1613 . . Published: 06 January 2021 Accepted: 01 November 2020 Revised: 01 August 2020 Received: 01 November 2019 . . Citation in BibTeX format . . ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), Volume 39, Issue 2 (April 2021) hps://doi.org/10.1145/3434185 EISSN: 1558-2868 .

===== PAGE 2 =====
20 A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research MAURIZIO FERRARI DACREMA, SIMONE BOGLIO, and PAOLO CREMONESI, Politecnico di Milano, Italy DIETMAR JANNACH,University of Klagenfurt, Austria Thedesignofalgorithmsthatgeneratepersonalizedrankeditemlistsisacentraltopicofresearchinthefield ofrecommendersystems.Inthepastfewyears,inparticular,approachesbasedondeeplearning(neural)tech- niqueshavebecomedominantintheliterature.Forallofthem,substantialprogressoverthestate-of-the-art isclaimed.However,indicationsexistofcertainproblemsintoday’sresearchpractice,e.g.,withrespecttothe choice and optimization of the baselines used for comparison, raising questions about the published claims. To obtain a better understanding of the actual progress, we have compared recent results in the area of neu- ral recommendation approaches based on collaborative filtering against a consistent set of existing simple baselines. The worrying outcome of the analysis of these recent works—all were published at prestigious scientificconferencesbetween2015and2018—isthat11ofthe12reproducibleneuralapproachescanbeout- performed by conceptually simple methods, e.g., based on the nearest-neighbor heuristic or linear models. None of the computationally complex neural methods was actually consistently better than already existing learning-based techniques, e.g., using matrix factorization or linear models. In our analysis, we discuss com- monissuesintoday’sresearchpractice,which,despitethemanypapersthatarepublishedonthetopic,have apparently led the field to a certain level of stagnation.1 CCSConcepts:• Informationsystems → Recommendersystems;Collaborativefiltering;• Generaland reference→ Evaluation; Additional Key Words and Phrases: Recommender systems, deep learning, evaluation; reproducibility ACM Reference format: MaurizioFerrariDacrema,SimoneBoglio,PaoloCremonesi,andDietmarJannach.2020.ATroublingAnalysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research.ACM Trans. Inf. Syst.39, 2, Article 20 (January 2021), 49 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3434185 1 INTRODUCTION Personalized recommendations are a common feature of many modern online services, e.g., on e-commerce, media streaming, and social media sites. In many cases, these recommendations are 1This article significantly extends or own previous work presented in References [19,23]. Authors’ addresses: M. Ferrari Dacrema, S. Boglio, and P. Cremonesi, Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy; emails: maur- izio.ferrari@polimi.it,simone.boglio@mail.polimi.it,paolo.cremonesi@polimi.it;D.Jannach,UniversityofKlagenfurt,Kla- genfurt, Austria; email: dietmar.jannach@aau.at. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting withcredit is permitted.To copy otherwise, or republish, to poston servers or toredistribute tolists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions frompermissions@acm.org. © 2020 Association for Computing Machinery. 1046-8188/2020/01-ART20 $15.00 https://doi.org/10.1145/3434185 ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 3 =====
20:2 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. generatedusing collaborativefiltering(CF) techniques[7].Suchtechniquesleveragethepreference or activity profiles of a large user community to predict which are the most relevant items for the individualcustomer.Earlytechnicalapproachestobuildcollaborativefilteringrecommendersys- tems (RS) were based on nearest-neighbor techniques and date back to the 1990s [41, 58]. In the followingyearsnumerousmachinelearningapproacheswereproposedforthe top-nrecommenda- tiontask,whichistoranktheavailableitemsaccordingtotheirassumedrelevancefortheuser.In themostrecentyears,recommendationmethodsbasedondeeplearning(DL)or“neural”technol- ogy have become particularly popular. While these methods are often computationally complex, their solid success in other application areas—such as language or image processing—led to deep learning techniques nowadays dominating the recommender systems research landscape. However, there are a number of indications that using increasingly deeper learning methods is not as beneficial as one would expect. For example, in two recent papers [39, 78], the authors report that for a certain information retrieval task recent neural methods are actually not better thanlong-existingnon-neuralones.Inthedomainoftimeseriesprediction,Makridakisetal.[ 46] comparedvariousstatisticalmethodswithtraditionalandrecentneuralmethodsandobservedthat statisticalmethodsweremostlyfavorableovereventhemostrecentmachinelearningtechniques. In the area of recommender systems, the empirical analyses in References [44, 45]s h o w e dt h a t sometimesalmosttrivialmethodscanoutperformthelatestneuralmethodsforthetaskofsession- basedrecommendations.Thesefindingsare,however,nottiedtorecentdeeplearningapproaches alone. The observationthat thereportedimprovements in the literature for certain retrievaltasks “don’taddup”wasputforwardbackin2009[ 3].Mostoften,thereasonforsuch phantomprogress lies in the choice and poor optimization of the baselines used in the experiments. Lin [40], while recognizing the progress made by transformer models for certain tasks of document retrieval, observed it is not rare to find articles comparing neural ranking algorithms only against weak baselines, raising questions regarding the empirical rigor in the field. For the domain of rating prediction for recommender systems, Rendle et al. [57] found that many algorithms that were publishedbetween2015and2019actuallydidnotoutperformlonger-existingmethods,whenthese were properly tuned. Intheirpaper,Rendleetal.attributetheproblemnotonlytopoorlyoptimizedbaselinesbutalso tothesometimesmissingstandardizedbenchmarks.Insomesense,thisfindingissurprising,since theresearchcommunityoverthelastdecadeshasindeeddevelopedcertainstandardsregardingthe evaluationof top-nrecommendationalgorithms.Typically,theinputtoanalgorithmisamatrixof user-iteminteractionsandthetaskistocomputerelevancescoresforthemissingentriesorjustto ranktheitems.Anumberofpublicdatasetsexiststhatcanbeusedforreproducibleevaluation,as wellasvariouswell-establishedevaluationmetrics.Finally,thetechnicaldetailsofnewlyproposed algorithms areoftenlaidoutingreatdetailinscientificpapersandsometimesauthorsevenshare the code they used in their experiments. This methodological approach for benchmarking algorithms seems very solid at first sight and suitable to determine if an algorithm is favorable over another in a specific combination of (i)performancemeasure, (ii)evaluationprocedure,and (iii)dataset,atleastwhenweassumethat both algorithms are properly optimized. However, the claims made in many research papers are much more general. As can be observed in other fields of computer science, many papers claim a significantimprovementoverthe“state-of-the-art”butdonotexplicitlystatesuchclaimtobeonly supportedunderveryspecificexperimentalconditions.Intoday’srecommendersystemsresearch scholarship the researcher has ample freedom in selecting the specific experimental conditions, i.e., which metrics, which protocol, which datasets, and which baselines to use. Given these observations regarding potential methodological issues in our field, we were won- dering to what extent recent deep learning methods actually help to achieve progress in creating ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 4 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:3 top-nrecommendationlistsbasedonuser-itemratingmatrices.Tothatpurpose,weconductedan extensive set of experiments in which we tried to reproduce the results reported in papers that were recently published in top-tier scientific conferences. We scanned the proceedings of several conferenceseriesandidentified26relevantpapers.Wecouldreproduce12(46%)ofthemwithrea- sonableeffort.Afterfine-tuninganumberofestablishedbaselinesalgorithms,itturnedoutthatin 8 of the reproducible cases, simple and long-known approaches (e.g., based on nearest neighbors) outperformed the latest neural methods. Furthermore, when including established linear models based on machine learning (e.g., based on matrix factorization),we found that only 1 of 12 recent neuralmethodswasclearlybetterthanthenon-neuralbaselines .Andeveninthiscase,thiswastrue foronlyoneoftheconsidereddatasets.Overall,theseresultsindicatecertainsignsofstagnationin thecontextofapplyingmachinelearningmethodsfor top-nrecommendationtasks,despitemany papers published every year claiming substantial progress. The rest of the article is organized as follows. Next, in Section2, we describe how we selected relevantworksconsideredinourstudy.Section 3providesdetailsaboutourresearchmethodology, and Section4 lists our results in detail. The potential reasons for the observed phenomena are finally discussed in Section5. 2 IDENTIFYING RELEV ANT AND REPRODUCIBLE WORKS To make sure our research is neither focusing on a few hand-picked examples nor singling out any individual researcher, we followed a systematic approach to identify recent papers that are relevant for our analysis. To obtain a suitable sample for our research, we considered papers that fulfilled the following constraints. (1) Topic.The paper proposed a new neural collaborative filtering recommendation method fortop-nrecommendation tasks. Hybrid techniques with a collaborative filtering compo- nent were considered as well. We limited ourselves to works that focus on the traditional itemrankingtask.Papersthatdealtwithothertasks,e.g.,session-basedrecommendation or group recommendation, were not considered to be in the scope of our study. Further- more,tobeconsidered,apaperhadtoreportatleastonerankingorclassificationaccuracy metric. Papers that focused solely on rating or relevance prediction tasks, e.g., using the RMSE, were not taken into account. (2) Publication date.The paper was published between 2015 and 2018 in one of the fol- lowingconferences:SIGIR,KDD,TheWebConf(WWW),IJCAI,WSDM,ACMRecSys.All of the mentioned conferences are typical outlets for recommender systems research in computerscience.Furthermore,all ofthem,except ACM RecSys,are ratedwith A∗inthe AustralianCORErankingsystem.ACMRecSys,incontrast,isentirelyfocusedonrecom- mender systems, which is why we included it in the study as well. We identified relevant papers by scanning the proceedings of these conference series in a manual process. (3) Reproducible experimental setup.The experimental setting was reproducible, with reasonable effort, based on source code published by the authors. This constitutes a pre- condition for the reproducibility of the published results.2 •In particular, the source code should include the implementation of the model and its datastructures,atrainloop,andawayofcomputingtherecommendations;seealsothe discussions by Collberg and Proebsting [15]. For some of the relevant papers we found 2In theory, research papers should contain all relevant information that are needed to implement the proposed algorithm. In reality, however, certain details are sometimes omitted in length-restricted conference papers. For that reason, and to ensure that the results that we report here are reliable, we followed a conservative approach and limited ourselves to the papers where the original authors themselves provided an implementation of their method. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 5 =====
20:4 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. Table 1. Statistics of Relevant and Reproducible Works on Deep Learning Algorithms for Top-nRecommendation per Conference Series from 2015 to 2018 Conference Rep. Setup ratio Reproducible Setup Non-Reproducible Setup KDD 3/4 (75%) [ 32], [37], [73] [67] IJCAI 5/7 (71%) [ 29], [80], [79], [13], [77] [51], [76] WWW 2/4 (50%) [ 30], [38] [66], [22] SIGIR 1/3 (30%) [ 21] [48], [12] RecSys 1/7 (14%) [ 81] [65], [8], [60], [68], [34], [71] WSDM 0/1 (0%) [75] Total 12/26 (46%) that some source code was published but was missing major parts, e.g., it consisted onlyofaskeletonofthealgorithm,ordidnotwork.Forthosepapersthatweredeemed relevant but for which the source code was not publicly available or was not runnable, we contactedall authorsof the papersby e-mail. When there was no positive response after 30 days, we considered the source code of the paper to be not available. •At least one of the datasets that were used in the original paper for evaluation was publicly available. In some cases, the authors also provided the data splits for training and testing that were used in their experiments. If the data splits were not available, then the experimental setup of the papers was considered as reproducible only if they contained sufficient information about data pre-processing and splitting.3 Followingthisapproach,weidentified 26relevantpapers.Ofthese, 12wereconsideredhaving a reproducible experimental setup, according to our classification scheme. Table1 summarizes which works were considered relevant and which ones had a reproducible setup.4 Ourfirstcontributioninthisworkisthereforeananalysisofthereproducibility—atleastwhen using our specific practical definition—of research works published on neural collaborative filter- ing. We generally found that the share of papers that can be reproduced based on the provided source code by the authors is still relatively low. When looking at the statistics over the years, we can observe a certain trend towards authors sharing their source code more often. One possible reason is that reproducibility in general is considered a positive point in the reviewing process, e.g., at KDD. 3 EV ALUATION METHODOLOGY Thecoreofourstudywastore-runtheexperimentsreportedintheoriginalpapersfollowingthe original experimental methodology, including additional baseline methods which were systemat- ically fine-tuned just like the newly proposed methods. To ensure the reproducibility of this study, we share all the data, the source code used for pre- processing, hyperparameter optimization, algorithms, and the evaluation as well as all hyperpa- rameter values and results online.5 3In case we encountered problems with the provided code, the data, or the reproduction of the results, we also contacted the authors for assistance. 4Amongthepaperswithareproducibleexperimentalsetup,thereweresomeworkswherethenumericalresultscouldnot bereproducedexactly,namely,References[ 77,79,80].Thereproducibilityofthenumericalresultsishowevernotacriterion fortheinclusionorexclusionofthealgorithminouranalysis.Ourapproachthereforecombinesaspectsofreproducibility andreplicabilityaccordingtotheterminologyintheSIGIRguidelines: https://sigir.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/p004. pdf; see also ACM Artifact Review and Badging:https://www.acm.org/publications/policies/artifact-review-badging. 5https://github.com/MaurizioFD/RecSys2019_DeepLearning_Evaluation. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 6 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:5 3.1 Measurement Approach Our analysis of the relevant papers shows that researchers use all sorts of datasets, evaluation protocols, and metrics in their experiments, see also Section5.2. To make our analyses and com- parisons as fair as possible, we decided to run our evaluations in exactly the same way as the authors of the originally proposed method did, i.e., using their datasets, their protocol, and their performance metrics. To obtain a broader understanding of the model performance, we also in- cluded additional baselines.6 To ensure all algorithms are evaluated under the same conditions, we re-factored the original code so that we could include it in our evaluation framework along with the additional baselines. The core algorithm implementations remained unaltered. We evaluated the algorithms using the datasetsreportedintheoriginalpapers,providedthattheywereeitherpubliclyavailableorshared bytheauthors.Wealsousedtheoriginaltrain/testsplitwhenevertheauthorssharedit;otherwise, we created the data split ourselves following the information provided in the original paper. Extensive hyperparameter optimization was performed for all examined baselines. For the in- vestigatedneuralmethods,inallbutonecase,wereliedontheoptimalhyperparametersreported intheoriginalpapers.Thisisappropriate,asweusedthesamedatasetsandevaluationprocedures in the experiments. The only exception is the SpectralCF algorithm (SectionA.12), for which we performedanewhyperparameteroptimizationourselvesduetoanissuewiththeprovideddataset splits, as will be discussed later. Since the number of epochs and the stopping criteria are usually not described in the original papers, for all machine learning models we select the number of epochs viaearly stopping, see also Section3.3. The optimal hyperparameters were selected via a Bayesian search [2, 26, 31], using the Scikit- Optimize7 implementation. We considered 50 cases for each algorithm during this search. The first 15 of them were used as initial random points. Once the optimal hyperparameters were de- termined, including the number of epochs, the final model was fitted on the union of train and validationdatausingthoseoptimalhyperparameters.Theconsideredhyperparameterrangesand distributions are listed in AppendixB. 3.2 Baselines Over the last 25 years, a multitude of algorithms of different types were proposed. To obtain a picturethatisasbroadaspossible,weselectedalgorithmsofdifferentfamiliesforinclusioninour measurements. An overview of all used baselines is given in Table2 and the respective hyperpa- rameter ranges are reported in AppendixB. Our analysis shows that a large variety of other baselines is used in the works we investigated. This variety of baselines (together with the variety of datasets) represents one of the underlying problems that we identified, because it limits the comparability of results across papers. In our work,wethereforebenchmarktheproposedmodelsagainstaconsistentsetofknownalgorithms of different families. 3.2.1 Popularity-based Ranking. Recommending the most popular items to everyone is a com- monstrategyinpractice.Themethod TopPopularimplementsthisnon-personalizedrecommen- dation approach. The popularity of an item is determined by its number of implicit or explicit ratings in the given dataset. 6An alternative would have been to integrate all methods in one unified framework for evaluation, as done in Reference [44], and evaluate them on a set of representative datasets. This approach would allow a direct comparison of neural approaches as in Reference [45], which was, however, not the goal of our work. 7https://scikit-optimize.github.io/. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 7 =====
20:6 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. Table 2. Overview of Baseline Methods Family Method Description Non-personalized TopPopular Recommends the most popular items to everyone [ 18] Nearest-neighbor UserKNN User-based k-nearest neighbors [ 58] ItemKNN Item-based k-nearest neighbors [ 61] Graph-based P3α A graph-based method based on random walks [16] RP3β An extension of P3α[54] Content-based and Hybrid ItemKNN-CBF ItemKNN with content-based similarity [ 43] ItemKNN-CFCBF A simple item-based hybrid CBF/CF approach [50] UserKNN-CBF UserKNN with content-based similarity UserKNN-CFCBF A simple user-based hybrid CBF/CF approach Non-Neural Machine Learning iALS Matrix factorization for implicit feedback data [ 33] pureSVD A basic matrix factorization method [ 18] SLIM A scalable linear model [ 36,52] EASER A recent linear model, similar to auto-encoders [63] 3.2.2 Nearest-neighbor Methods. Nearest-neighbor techniques were used in the early Grou- pLens system [58] and first successful reports of collaborative filtering systems also used nearest- neighbor techniques [41]. We consider bothuser-based and item-based variants, UserKNN and ItemKNN. Many variants of the basic nearest-neighbor prediction scheme were proposed over the years, see Reference [10] for an early performance comparison. In this work, we therefore consider dif- ferentvariationsofthenearest-neighbortechniquesaswell.ForbothUserKNNandItemKNN,the following hyperparameters can be set and were optimized in our experiments, their ranges are reported in AppendixB. •Neighborhood Size: This main parameter determines how many neighbors are considered for prediction. •SimilarityMeasure:WemadeexperimentswiththeJaccardcoefficient[ 55]aswellasCosine [61], Asymmetric Cosine [1], Dice-Sørensen [20], and Tversky [69] similarities. Some of thesesimilaritymeasuresalsohavetheirownparameters,asreportedinAppendix B,which we optimized as well. •Shrinkage: As proposed in Reference [5], we used a parameter (theshrink term)t ol o w e r the similarity between items that have only few interactions in common. The shrinkage is applied to all similarities. •Feature Weighting: Using feature weighting for ratings was proposed in Reference [74]. In our experiments, we both tested configurations with no weighting and weighting with ei- ther the TF-IDF or the BM25 scheme. •Normalization: This setting determines if we should consider the denominator in the simi- laritymeasureasnormalization.Onlysomeofthesimilaritymeasureshavethisparameter. 3.2.3 Graph-based Methods. Traditional nearest-neighbor models consider “direct” neighbor- hoods by computing similarities between pairs of objects. Graph-based models can help to overcome this possible limitation relying on a broader interpretation of neighborhoods. In our study, we consider two such graph-based methods called P3α[16]a n dR P3β[54]. Both methods often lead to good recommendation quality at low computational cost. Interestingly, based on the comparatively limited number of citations they received, these two methods appear to be almost ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 8 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:7 unknowninthecommunityandseldomusedasbaselines,despitethefactthattheyareverysim- ple, effective and have been published in top-tier venues. •P3α:Thismethodimplementsatwo-stepsrandomwalkfromuserstoitemsandvice-versa, where the probabilities to jump between users and items are computed from the normal- ized ratings raised to the power ofα. The method is equivalent to a KNN item-based CF algorithm, with the similarity matrix being computed as the dot-product of the probability vectors [16]. In addition to what is described in the original algorithm, we normalize each rowofthesimilaritymatrixwithits l1norm.Thehyperparametersofthealgorithminclude the size of the neighborhood and the value forα. •RP 3β:ThisisanimprovedversionofP 3αproposedinReference[ 54].InRP 3β,eachsimilarity between two items is computed with P3αand divided by the popularity of the items raised to the power ofβ. Again, we normalize each row of the similarity matrix with itsl1n o r m . If βis 0, then RP3βis equivalent to P3α. The hyperparameters of the algorithm are the size of the neighborhood and the values forαand β. 3.2.4 Content-based and Hybrid Methods. Someoftheneuralmethodsinvestigatedinthisarti- cleincludesideinformationaboutitemsorusers.Wehavethereforeincludedtwosimplebaselines that make usage of content information. •ItemKNN-CBF,UserKNN-CBF:Aneighborhood-basedcontent-based-filtering(CBF)ap- proach, where we compute the item (or user) similarities based on the items’ (or user’s) content features (attributes) [43]. We tested the same set of similarity measures described for the collaborative KNN methods (Jaccard coefficient, Cosine, Asymmetric Cosine, Dice- Sørensen and Tversky similarity). The hyperparameters are the same as for the ItemKNN and UserKNN methods. •ItemKNN-CFCBF, UserKNN-CFCBF: A hybrid algorithm based on item-item (or user- user)similaritiesanddescribedinReference[ 50].Thesimilaritybetweenitemsiscomputed by first concatenating, for each item, the vector of implicit ratings (collaborative features) and the vector of item attributes (content features) and by later computing the similarity between the concatenated vectors. In case of user-user similarities the algorithm operates in a similar way, concatenating the vector of implicit ratings of each user with the user’s content feature vector. The hyperparameters and similarity measures are the same as for ItemKNN, plus a parameterw that controls the relative importance of the content features with respect to the collaborative features. Whenw is 0, this algorithm is equivalent to the pure collaborative versions, either ItemKNN or UserKNN. 3.2.5 Non-neural Machine Learning Approaches. A wide variety of machine learning models were proposed fortop-n recommendation tasks in the literature. In our experiments, we included a number of comparably basic models from the literature as representatives of which methods were often considered the state-of-the-art in pre-neural times. •Matrix Factorization (MF)Techniques: The application of matrix decomposition methods for collaborative filtering problems was investigated already in the early years of recom- mender systems [9], and became a de-facto standard after the Netflix prize competition (2006–2009).Wemadeexperimentswithmanyvariants,butwilllimitourdiscussiontotwo maintechniquesthatprovedtoconsistentlyleadtocompetitiveresultsamongthedifferent MF techniques. — iALS: In their seminal work [33], Hu et al. proposed an Alternating Least Squares approach for implicit feedback datasets, which turns implicit feedback signals into ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 9 =====
20:8 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. confidence values. The authors also proposed a particular optimization method that has the advantage of scaling well on larger datasets. A number of hyperparameters can be tuned for the method, including the number of latent factors, the confidence scaling and the regularization factor. — PureSVD: This method corresponds to a basic matrix factorization approach as pro- posedinReference[ 18].ToimplementPureSVD,weusedastandardSVDdecomposition method provided in thescikit-learn package for Python.8 The only hyperparameter of this method is the number of latent factors. •Sparse Linear Models (SLIM): SLIM was proposed as a well-performing regression-based method fortop-n recommendation tasks in Reference [52]. In our work, we use the more scalablevariantproposedinReference[ 36](SLIMElasticNet),whichlearnstheitemsim- ilaritymatrixoneitematatime(e.g.,onecolumn w atatime)bysolvingaregressionprob- lem in such a way that the interactions for the target itemy are learned by using all other interactions as training data. To implementSLIM ElasticNetwe used a standard ElasticNet solver provided in thescikit-learn package for Python.9 The hyperparameters of this method include the ratio ofl1 and l2 regularizations as well as a regularization magnitude coefficient. •EASER: In a recent article [63] the author showed that an “embarrassingly shallow” linear model,whichsharessimilaritieswithanauto-encoder,canproducehighlyaccuraterecom- mendationsthatoftenoutperformexistingandmuchmorecomplextechniques.Apeculiar- ityofthismodelistheexistenceofaclosed-formsolutionforthetrainingobjective,which results in very fast training. The only hyperparameter is the choice of the regularization factor. This algorithm has been published in 2019 and, as such, the papers covered by our study could not include EASER as a baseline. However, we include EASER to investigate whether shallow auto-encoders are able to provide, on average, more accurate recommen- dations with respect to complex deep-learning architectures. 3.3 Early-stopping Approach Many machine learning models are trained for anumber of epochsin which the model’s perfor- mance varies, first increasing and then stabilizing, while usually exhibiting some degree of vari- ance. The number of epochs therefore represents another important parameter to be determined. However,itisworthnotingthatinthearticleswehaveanalyzedneitherthenumberofepochsnor the stopping criteria are usually mentioned. The procedure in which this parameter was chosen in the original articles is therefore not clear. Looking at the code shared by the authors we could observe that, in some cases, the number of epochs was inappropriately selected via an evaluation doneonthetestdata,thereforecausinginformationleakagefromthetestdata.Inothercases,the reported metric values were inappropriately taken from different epochs. Early stopping is a widely used technique to select the optimal number of train epochs and is available in many libraries like Keras.10 The idea of early stopping is to periodically evaluate the model on the validation data, while the model is being trained, and stop the training when foracertainnumberofvalidationstepsthemodelqualityhasnotimprovedoverthebestsolution 8https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.utils.extmath.randomized_svd.html. 9https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.ElasticNet.html. 10For early stopping in Keras, seehttps://keras.io/callbacks/#earlystopping. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 10 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:9 Table 3. Overview of Reproducible Papers Paper Conference Collaborative Deep Learning for Recommender Systems (CDL) [73]11 KDD ’15 Collaborative Variational Autoencoder for Recommender Systems [37]12 KDD ’17 Neural Collaborative Filtering [30]13 WWW’17 Deep Matrix Factorization Models for Recommender Systems [77]14 IJCAI ’17 Variational Autoencoders for Collaborative Filtering [38]15 WWW’18 NeuRec: On Nonlinear Transformation for Personalized Ranking [80]16 IJCAI ’18 CoupledCF: Learning Explicit and Implicit User-item Couplings in Recommendation for Deep Collaborative Filtering [79]17 IJCAI ’18 DELF: A Dual-Embedding based Deep Latent Factor Model for Recommendation [13]18 IJCAI ’18 Outer Product-based Neural Collaborative Filtering [29]19 IJCAI ’18 Leveraging Meta-path based Context fortop-n Recommendation with a Neural Co-attention Model [32]20 KDD ’18 Collaborative Memory Network for Recommendation Systems [21]21 SIGIR ’18 Spectral Collaborative Filtering [81]22 RecSys ’18 foundsofar.Earlystoppinghastheadvantageofselectingthenumberofepochswithatransparent criterion, avoiding arbitrary manual optimization, and often results in shorter training times. To implement early stopping, we use two independent copies of the current model. One is the model that is still being trained, the other is the model frozen at the epoch with the best rec- ommendation quality found so far. If the trained model, after further epochs, exhibits better rec- ommendation quality than the best one found so far, then the best model is updated. Since the evaluationstepistimeconsuming,werunfivetrainepochsbeforeeachvalidationstep.Moreover, wechoosetostopthetrainingifforfiveconsecutivevalidationstepstherecommendationquality of the current model is worse than the best one found so far. 4 RESULTS—ANALYSIS OF REPRODUCIBILITY AND PROGRESS Inthissection,wesummarizethemainobservationsofourexperiments.Foreachanalyzedpaper, wedescribethebasicideaofthemethodandthesummaryofourresults.Amoredetailedanalysis is reported in AppendixA, where we describe(i) the baseline algorithms and datasets that were used in the original paper;(ii) the outcomes reported in the original work;(iii) our results after including and optimizing additional baselines. 11https://github.com/js05212/CDL. 12https://github.com/eelxpeng/CollaborativeVAE. 13https://github.com/hexiangnan/neural_collaborative_filtering. 14The source code was not publicly available but the authors shared it with us upon request. 15https://github.com/dawenl/vae_cf. 16https://github.com/cheungdaven/NeuRec. 17https://github.com/zhqgui/CoupledCF. 18The source code was not publicly available but the authors shared it with us upon request. 19https://github.com/duxy-me/ConvNCF. 20https://github.com/librahu/MCRec. 21https://github.com/tebesu/CollaborativeMemoryNetwork. 22https://github.com/lzheng21/SpectralCF. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 11 =====
20:10 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. Fig. 1. Overview of Neural Methods. Arrows indicate when a newer method used another one as baseline in the experiments. The analyzed papers were published between 2015 and 2018. We organize the discussion of the papers mostly by year of publication. The list of considered papers is shown in Table3.A n overviewofthetemporaldevelopmentandthedependenciesbetweentheapproachescanbefound in Figure1. The experimental evaluation reported in this article required significant computational effort. In total, we report the recommendation quality of more than 900 trained models (counting both baselinesandreproducibledeeplearningalgorithms).Whentakingintoaccountthehyperparam- etertuningprocedure,41,000modelswerefitted,correspondingtoatotalcomputationtimeof253 days.23 4.1 Collaborative Deep Learning for Recommender Systems (CDL) Method. CDL is the earliest method in our analysis, published at KDD ’15 [73].24 CDL is a hybrid methodthatappliesdeeplearningtojointlylearnadeeprepresentationofcontentinformationand collaborative information. Technically, it is a probabilistic feed-forward model for joint learning of a stacked denoising autoencoder and collaborative filtering. Result summary. According to our experiments, simple hybrid baselines outperform CDL in three of four datasets. On a dense dataset, CDL is also outperformed by pure collaborative 23The computation time refers to the total instance time for one AWS instance p3.2xlarge, with 8 vCPU, 30GB RAM, and one Tesla V100-SXM2-16GB GPU. The detailed measurements are available in the online material. 24https://github.com/js05212/CDL. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 12 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:11 baselines with recommendation lists shorter than 100 items. CDL is only better than our base- lines on one small and very sparse dataset with only one interaction per user in the training set. From a methodological perspective, there is no indication of why comparably long list lengths, up to 300, were used for evaluation in the paper and why no measurements were reported for list lengths below 50, which is commonly the case in the literature. 4.2 Collaborative Variational Autoencoder (CV AE) Method. Like CDL, theCVAEmethod [37]25 is a hybrid technique that relies both on content information and collaborative features for recommending. The work was published at KDD ’17. Technically, the model learns deep latent representations from content data in an unsupervised manner and also considers implicit relationships between items and users from both content and ratings. Unlike previous works proposing denoising autoencoders, CVAE learns a latent distribu- tionforcontentinthelatentspaceinsteadoftheobservationspacethroughaninferencenetwork. Resultsummary.WhileCVAE,accordingtotheoriginalexperiments,outperformspreviousneu- ralmethodsincludingCDL[ 73],ourexperimentsindicatetheseneuralmethodswerenotnecessar- ily strong baselines. Our own experiments confirm the improvements of CVAE over the previous CDL method. However, similarly to CDL, simple hybrid methods outperformed CVAE in three of four datasets. CVAE is instead superior in one very sparse dataset that had only one interaction per user in the training set. 4.3 Neural Collaborative Filtering (NCF) Method.The Neuralnetwork-basedCollaborativeFiltering(NCF) [30]26 frameworkwaspresented at WWW ’17 and rapidly became very influential, being used as a baseline for most later neural recommendation approaches, as shown in Figure1. The framework generalizes matrix factoriza- tion in a way that the commonly used inner product is replaced by a neural architecture, which can learn different types of functions from the data and therefore can also model non-linearities. Differentvariantsareconsideredinthepaper:GeneralizedMatrixFactorization,Multi-LayerPer- ceptron, and Neural Matrix Factorization, where the last one, called NeuMF is an ensemble of the other two. In our evaluation, we only consider Neural Matrix Factorization, because this method led to the best results. Result summary. In our experiments, we could observe that, for one of two datasets, nearest- neighbor methods outperform NCF on all measurements. For the other dataset, NFC was better than the nearest-neighbor techniques, but not better than non-neural machine learning methods. Regarding methodological issues, we observed in the original source code that the number of training epochs, which should be optimized on the validation set, was erroneously optimized on the test data.27 4.4 Deep Matrix Factorization (DMF) Method.Deep Matrix Factorization Models (DMF)were proposed at IJCAI ’17 [77].28 As an input totheirmodel,theauthorsfirstbuildauser-itemmatrixfromexplicitratingsandimplicitfeedback, whichisthenusedbyadeep structurelearning architecture.Onekeyaspecthereisthatacommon low-dimensionalspaceforrepresentingusersanditemsisused.Furthermore,theauthorsdevelop 25https://github.com/eelxpeng/CollaborativeVAE. 26https://github.com/hexiangnan/neural_collaborative_filtering. 27Inaddition,Rendleetal.[ 56]confirmedthatNCFisnotabletoconsistentlyoutperformsimplenon-neuralbaselinesand experimentally showed that learning a dot product with a multilayer perceptron is not trivial. 28The source code was not publicly available but the authors shared it with us upon request. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 13 =====
20:12 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. a new loss function based on cross entropy that considers both implicit feedback and explicit ratings. Result summary. The proposed method is outperformed on three of four datasets by our long- known baselines. Only for one very sparse dataset, the proposed method was better than our baseline methods, in particular with respect to the Hit Rate.29 Regarding methodological aspects, w eo b s e rv edi nt h es o u r c ec od et h a tt h eH i tR a t ea n dN D C Gr e s u l t sa r er e po r t eda st h ebe s tv a l u e obtainedbyevaluatingonthetestdataduringtraining,regardlessoftheepoch.Inourexperiments, we report the results associated to the epoch selected via early stopping on the validation data. 4.5 Variational Autoencoders for Collaborative Filtering (Mult-V AE) Method.InReference[ 38],30 theauthorsproposeacollaborativefilteringmethodforrecommen- dation based on implicit feedback using variational autoencoders. The method is calledMult-VAE andwaspresentedatWWW’18.Technically,thepaperintroducesagenerativemodelwithmulti- nomial likelihood and a different regularization parameter for the learning objective, and uses Bayesian inference for parameter estimation. The authors furthermore show that there is an effi- cient way to tune the parameter using annealing. Result summary. We could reproduce the results reported in the original paper for two of three datasets and found that the proposed method outperforms all neighborhood-based baselines on all metrics by a large margin. The algorithm also outperforms all non-neural machine-learning baselines on one dataset. For the second dataset, however, the SLIM method was better when the optimization target was the same as the evaluation measure (NDCG). 4.6 NeuRec: On Nonlinear Transformation for Personalized Ranking Method.NeuRec[80]31 waspresentedatIJCAI’18.Theworkaimsatlearninguser-itemrelation- ships from implicit feedback and combines latent factor models with neural networks to capture bothlinearandnon-lineardependenciesinthedata.Technically,theuser-iteminteractionmatrix is first mapped into a low-dimensional space with multi-layered networks. Recommendations are then generated by computing the inner product of item and user latent factors. A user-based and an item-based variant are proposed. Resultsummary.Eventhoughtheauthorspublishedarunnableimplementationoftheirmethod and provided detailed information on the hyperparameters, we could not obtain the results re- portedintheoriginalpaper.Wecontactedtheauthorsbutevenwiththeirhelpthereasonforthis differences could not be clarified. In our experiments, the method is consistently outperformed by many of our baselines on three of four commonly used datasets. Only on one small dataset and for one individual measure at a short list length the proposed method is slightly better than our baselines. Regarding methodological aspects, we found again that the number of epochs was erroneously optimized on the test data, furthermore based on the provided source code, the best results of NeuRec are reported for different measures at potentially different training epochs. In our experiments, we report the results associated to the epoch selected via early stopping on the validation data. 29TheHitRatemeasuresifasinglehiddentruepositivewaspartofthetop-nrecommendationlist,see,e.g.,Reference[ 79] for a formal definition. The metric is similar to Recall. 30https://github.com/dawenl/vae_cf. 31https://github.com/cheungdaven/NeuRec. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 14 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:13 4.7 CoupledCF: Learning Explicit and Implicit User-item Couplings Method. CoupledCF [79]32 was also presented at IJCAI ’18. The approach is based on the obser- vationthatusersanditemsinreal-worlddatasetsarenotindependentandidenticallydistributed. The proposed method therefore aims to learn implicit and explicit couplings between users and items and to thereby leverage available side information (e.g., user demographics, item features) more effectively. Technically, a complex architecture is used, involving a CNN for learning the couplings based on the side information and a deep CF model that considers explicit and implicit interactions between users and items.33 Result summary. For one of two datasets, the non-deep machine learning models were consis- tently better than the proposed method. For the second dataset, nearest-neighbor methods were preferable. Regarding methodological aspects, from the available source code, we could observe that the number of training epochs was selected using the test data and that the provided data splitsexhibitsinconsistencieswiththesplittingproceduredescribedinthepaper.Furthermore,as describedintheoriginalpaper,thedefaulthyperparametersforsomebaselinesareused,meaning they were not properly optimized. 4.8 DELF: A Dual-embedding-based Deep Latent Factor Model for Recommendation Method.The DELFmodel[13],34 presentedatIJCAI’18,wasdesignedfor top-nrecommendation tasksgivenimplicitfeedbackdata.Inspiredbypreviouswork(NSVD)[ 53],theauthorsproposeto learndualembeddingstocapturecertaininteractionsinthedata.Insteadofusingonlythecommon user embedding, the authors propose to learn an additional item-based user embedding and vice versa for item embeddings. The embeddings are then combined to model non-linear interactions between users and items within a deep learning architecture. Through this approach the authors generalizeideasofNSVDandNeuralCollaborativeFiltering(NCF).Twovariantsoftheapproach, DELF-MLPand DELF-EFwere investigated in the original paper. Result summary. Two datasets,MovieLensandAmazon Music, were used for the evaluation. On the movies dataset,DELF was consistently outperformed by our machine learning baselines. The performance ofDELF on the music dataset was, however, substantially better than all baselines. An investigation of this phenomenon revealed that when using theAmazon Musicwith a time- basedsplittingcriterion,morethanhalfofthetestitemsneverappearedinthetrainingset,which is an uncommon setup for evaluating pure collaborative filtering approaches. The relatively high accuracyof DELFthereforestemsfromitstendencytopushcolditems—forwhichitcouldnothave learnedanythinginthetrainingphase—tothetopendoftherecommendationlists.Anadditional experiment in which cold items are not considered in the evaluation—which is a more suitable setupwhenevaluatingpurecollaborativefilteringmethods—showsthattheperformanceof DELF againdropsbelowthatofthemachinelearningbaselines.Lookingatmethodologicalaspects,like inotherworksdiscussedhere,theauthorsdidnotoptimizethenumberofepochsonthevalidation set but took the best values obtained when testing. 32https://github.com/zhqgui/CoupledCF. 33Theclaimthatthe outer product of embeddingsis equivalentto animageandthattheCNN allowsto modelembedding correlationshasbeenlaterquestionedbyFerrariDacremaetal.[ 24].SimilarconsiderationsapplyforConvNCF,discussed in Section4.9. 34The source code was not publicly available but the authors shared it with us upon request. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 15 =====
20:14 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. 4.9 Outer Product-based Neural Collaborative Filtering (ConvNCF) Method.T h eConvNCF method [29]35 was presented at IJCAI ’18. Its main idea is to explicitly modelthepairwisecorrelationsbetweenthedimensionsoftheembeddingusinganouterproduct. With this technique, the authors aim to create aninteraction map, which is more expressive than existing methods that use simple concatenations of embeddings or element-wise products.33 Result summary. Two datasets were used for the evaluation, traditional nearest-neighbor base- lines are consistently better than the proposed method on one dataset and better except for one measurement on the other. Regarding methodological aspects, based on the provided source code the number of epochs, as in other papers, was determined on the test data. Furthermore, the au- thors decided to set the embedding size to the constant value of 64 for all baselines. However, the embedding size is a hyperparameter to be tuned for each dataset and for each embedding-based algorithm,asdifferentmodelswithdifferentobjectivefunctionsortrainingprocedureswilllikely require different values for it. 4.10 Leveraging Meta-path-based Context (MCRec) Method.The MCRec[32]36 methodwaspublishedatKDD’18.Itisahybridmethodthatusesside informationabouttherecommendableitemsintherecommendationprocess.Thesideinformation is represented as a network structure, and meta-paths are relation sequences that connect objects in this graph. Technically, the authors use a priority-based sampling technique to select more informative paths instances and a novel co-attention mechanism to improve the representations of meta-path-based context, users and items. Resultsummary .Theauthorsprovidedanimplementationthathadthemeta-pathshard-coded, and we therefore could reliably reproduce the results only for the small MovieLens dataset. For thisdataset,however,itturnedoutthatthetraditionalitem-basednearest-neighbortechniquewas better than MCRec on all performance measures. In the context of this work, additional problems were identified based on the provided source code. For example, the accuracy metrics reported by the source code correspond to the maximum values that are obtained across different epochs when evaluating on the test data. Furthermore, in the original article, the hyperparameters of the examined baselines were said to be taken from the original papers and not optimized for the datasets used in the evaluation. Finally, the NDCG metric was implemented in an uncommon way. 4.11 Collaborative Memory Network for Recommendation System (CMN) Method. Collaborative Memory Networks (CMN) [21]37 was presented at SIGIR ’18, and it represents a collaborative-filtering approach based on memory networks and neural attention mechanisms. The underlying idea of the approach is to combine latent factor with neighborhood (memory-based) approaches in a non-linear fashion. Resultsummary.Fortwodatasetsofthree,therecentCMNmethodwasoutperformedbymostof thesimplerbaselines.Onthethirddataset,CMNwasmuchbetterthanourpersonalizedbaselines, but this dataset has such a skewed distribution that recommending the most popular items to everyonewasbyfarthemosteffectivemethodinthisevaluation.Therelativelygoodperformance of CMN in this setting is therefore attributed to the higher popularity bias of CMN. 35https://github.com/duxy-me/ConvNCF. 36https://github.com/librahu/MCRec. 37https://github.com/tebesu/CollaborativeMemoryNetwork. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 16 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:15 Fig.2. NormalizedpopularitydistributionsofthetrainandtestsplitsforSpectralCF,thevalue1corresponds to the most popular item in that split. For a random split, as can be seen in panel (b), the normalized values of both splits are, on average, similar. In the split provided by the original authors, however, as can be seen in panel (a), train and test data have quite different distributions. 4.12 Spectral Collaborative Filtering (SpectralCF) Method. SpectralCF, presented at RecSys ’18 [81],38 is a graph-based approach. Users and items arerepresentedasabipartitegraph.Thenoveltyofthismethodisaconvolutionapproachthatop- eratesonthe spectraldomain.Themethodconsidersbothproximityandconnectivityinformation in the graph, which is assumed to be particularly helpful for cold-start problems. Result summary. In our initial experiments, we found that the algorithm was competitive with our baselines only for one of three datasets. Specifically, it was the dataset for which the authors shared the train-test split. An investigation revealed the distribution of the data in the provided test set was very different from what we would likely obtain by applying a random sampling procedure.Aftercreatingthetrain-testsplitsbyourown,wefoundthatSpectralCFdoesnotwork as expected and consistently exhibits lower performance when compared with personalized and even non-personalized baselines. Toillustratethedatasplittingproblem,wecomparedthepopularitydistributionoftheitemsin thetrainingandthetestsplitintheprovideddata;seeFigure 2(a).Thefigureplotsthenormalized popularity (i.e., the popularity of an item over the popularity of the most popular item) for both training and test items. Items are ranked based on their popularity in the training set, with the mostpopulartrainingitemsbeingontheleft.Incaseofatruerandomsplit,thenormalizedpopu- larity values of the items in the training and the test split should be relatively close. However, the figure shows the split provided by the authors has some major deviations. Figure2(b) shows the popularitydistributionsofourrandomsplit,whicharealmostidenticalbetweentrainingandtest sets. 5 DISCUSSION Our work indicates that rather limited progress was made through deep learning approaches ap- pliedtotheclassic top-nrecommendationproblem,atleastwhenconsideringthepapersthatwere analyzed in the present work and that were published at top-level scientific conferences. While 38https://github.com/lzheng21/SpectralCF. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 17 =====
20:16 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. many papers claiming to make advances over the state of the art were published, these mostly seemedtoamounttophantomprogress.Inthissection,wewillreviewthepossiblecausesforthe apparent stagnation in this field. We hope that an increased awareness of these causes can help ensuring progress in the future and lead to the development of even more powerful top-n recom- mendationapproaches.Wewillstructureourdiscussionsalongthreedimensions:reproducibility, methodology,andfundamentalconsiderations.Pleasenotethatalmostalldiscussedissuesarenot tiedtodeeplearningtechniques,andourarticleshouldthereforenotbeunderstoodasacriticism of deep learning in general or in recommender systems research. 5.1 Reproducibility ThereproducibilitystatisticsfortheconferencesweanalyzedinthisstudyarereportedinTable 1. Using our specific criteria, we found that 12 of 26 papers could be reproduced based on the pro- vided code and publicly available data sets. In recent years, we could observe an increased trend for researchers to share the source code of their algorithms and experiments, probably due to theincreasedimportanceofreproducibilityasacriterionintheacademicpeer-reviewingprocess. Nonetheless, we found that for more than half of the papers the source code was either not pro- vided or it was lacking important details to the extent that a reliable reproduction of the results was made difficult or impossible. The reasons for not sharing the code, not even in private with other researchers, sometimes remain obscure. Technically, a scientific paper should contain all necessary information for oth- ers to reproduce the work. Nonetheless, providing the artifacts (code, data sets) that were used in the experiments is important, as details may sometimes be missing from the papers, e.g., for space reasons, that could have a significant impact on the observed results. Generally, however, establishing reproducibility in the context of algorithmic proposals, as discussed in our article, is relatively easy compared to other disciplines. Nowadays, applied research in deep learning is mostlybasedonpubliclibrariesandfreelyaccessiblesoftwaretools.Virtualizationtechnologycan also be leveraged effectively to make the entire software environment used for the experiments availabletothecommunity.Furthermore,whilemanyalgorithmshavesomenon-deterministicel- ements,theoverallperformanceisusuallyquitestableoverseveralruns,whichshouldallowother researchers to obtain at least comparable results when using the artifacts of the original authors. Sometimes,researchersarguethattheycannotprovidethecodebecauseoftherulesoftheorga- nizationemployingthem.Insomecases,thedatausedintheexperimentsisalsonotmadeavailable tothecommunity,whichmeansthatnoonewilleverhavethechancetoverify,andpossiblycon- testorfalsify,theclaimedresultsundertheexactsameconditions.Thisputsacademicresearchers in a certain dilemma. The scientific community is highly interested in both real-world problems and solutions that work in practice. From a scientific perspective, however, reproducibility and verifiability (or falsifiability) are the main guiding principles of scientific research. In the context of our study, we contacted the authors of papers where the artifacts were not publiclyavailable.Whilesomeoftheauthorsrespondedtoourinquiriesandsharedtheircodewith us,wefoundthatinthegreatmajorityofcases(10of14fornon-reproduciblepapers),wereceived noreply.Wecanonlyspeculateaboutthereasonsforthesephenomena.Clearly,providingcodefor otherscanleadtoasubstantialamountofextraworkfortheresearcher.Furthermore,ifreviewers do not put much emphasis on this, there might be not enough incentives for the researcher to go the extra mile [15,64]. At the same time, publishing all artifacts can make certain assumptions or limitations ofa methodmore obvious,e.g.,whenthescalabilityofamethodis limited.Ingeneral, however, it should be in the interest of the community, and hence of researchers themselves, that others can reproduce,confirm or falsify their results, as this is a cornerstone of scientific research ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 18 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:17 in the first place. For a discussion of the role of reproducibility as a scientific principle in other areas of computer science, see, e.g., Reference [25]. 5.2 Methodological Issues Throughout the article, we reported a number of methodological issues that contributed to the limited progress we have observed in the analyzed articles. Here, we summarize our main obser- vations. •Choiceofbaselines: Algorithmsfor top-nrecommendationproblemshavebeeninvestigated for decades, and now it is less than clear what represents the state-of-the-art. Determining the state-of-the-art can be difficult or even impossible due to the fact that there exist no general “best” algorithm. In fact, performance rankings of algorithms depend on a variety of factors, including the dataset characteristics or the evaluation procedure and measure. Another observation is that often only complex machine learning methods are considered as baselines. Comparably simple methods like P3αand RP3βare not widely known in the community, even though they were published at top-level venues and often lead to strong results. •Propagation of weak baselines:Nowadays, methods like NCF are often considered as com- petitivestate-of-the-artbaselines,eventhoughouranalysisshowedthattheyareoftennot better than relatively simple and well-known techniques. •Lack of proper tuning of baselines:This is probably the most striking observation of our analysisandisnotspecificallytiedtodeeplearningapproaches[ 57]ortorecommendation problems[39,40].Researchersapparentlyinvestsignificanteffortsinoptimizingtheirown newmethodbutdonotpaythesameattentiontotheirbaselines.Sometimes,authorssimply pickthehyperparametersettingsreportedtobeoptimalfromapreviouspaper,eventhough those may refer to a different dataset or experimental procedure. Probably, this behavior might be the result of aconfirmation bias, i.e., the tendency to search for results that affirm rather than refute prior research hypotheses. Regarding the choice of the baselines, we found that in some cases researchers reuse the ex- perimental design that was used in previous studies, i.e., they use the same datasets, evaluation protocol, and metrics, to demonstrate progress. This is in principle very meaningful as it helps thecomparisonofresults.However,thisalsomeansthattheexperimentalsetupisnotquestioned anymore, becauseit has been used by many researchersbefore. Some papersin our present study are based on two quite small CiteULike datasets that were used in some early deep learning pa- pers.Thesedatasetswerereusedbyotherauthorslateron,withoutquestioningifthesequitesmall datasets were representative for a larger set of real-world recommendation problems or whether they were useful at all to analyze certain phenomena. In our analysis, we even found that the Epinions dataset had such characteristics that the non-personalized recommendation of the most popular items was favorable over any personalized technique. In general, the reuse of experimental designs is still the exception rather than the norm. In our analysis, we found that researchers use a large variety of evaluation protocols, datasets, and performance measures in their experiments. This is expected in articles having different goals and aimed at different scenarios. However, in most cases, there is no particular argumentation on why a certain metric is used or why particular datasets from a certain domain serve as a basis for the research. To illustrate these phenomena, we show in Table4which datasets were used for evaluation in the reproducible papers. Besidesthefactthat12reproduciblearticlesused18differentdatasets,theauthorsalsoreliedon quite a number of different data splitting procedures, includingleave-one-out,leave-last-out,80/20 ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 19 =====
20:18 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. Table 4. Datasets Used by Reproducible Papers Dataset Paper Dataset Paper Amazon Movie [ 77] Amazon Music [ 77], [13] CiteULike-a [ 21], [37], [73] CiteULike-t [ 37], [73] Epinions [ 21] FilmTrust [ 80] Frappe [ 80] Gowalla [ 29] LastFM [ 81], [32] Movielens Hetrec [ 80] Movielens100K [ 32], [77] MovieLens1M [ 81], [30], [80], [79], [13] MovieLens20M [ 38] MSD [ 38] Netflix Prize [ 73], [38] Pinterest [ 21], [30] Tafeng [ 79] Yelp [ 81], [32], [29] training/test split, hold-out of users,o rretain only 1 or 10 interactions per user. When evaluating, researchers somewhat arbitrarily used 50, 100, or 1000 negative samples per positive sample for ranking. Moreover, the metrics–including the Hit Rate, Precision, Recall, MAP, or NDCG—were measuredonavarietyofcut-offthresholdsbetween1and300.Inaddition,severalpre-processing strategies were applied, for example, retaining only users or items with an arbitrary minimum number of interactions. In most cases, no justification is provided for why a particular choice of pre-processing,metricsandcut-offwasselectedandwhichrelevantscenarioaimstorepresent.As aresult—asrecentlypointedoutbyReference[ 11]—eachofthesechoicescanleadtocomparisons thatarevulnerabletomisinterpretationandthatmayleadtodifferentorevenoppositeoutcomes, depending on the exact combination of the used settings. One possible way to obtain a better understanding regarding what represents the state-of-the- art could be the adoption of standardized evaluation setups, where all regarded algorithms are evaluated in the same experimental conditions. Such an approach was for example followed in Reference[44]forsession-basedrecommendationproblems,wherethesamesetofmeasurements was applied for various datasets. In pre-neural times, such comparisons were often enabled by the use of recommender systems libraries like MyMediaLite39 or LibRec,40 which also included evaluation code. In contrast, the works analyzed in our study mostly implemented the evaluation routines from scratch, leading to certain problems as discussed in the article. Regarding the issue of baselines often not being properly tuned, one problematic factor with deeplearningmethodsisthatmostofthemarecomputationallycomplex,andsomeofthemhave a large number of hyperparameters to tune. Furthermore, it is usually also possible to vary the structure of the network in terms of the layers and nodes in each layer. An exhaustive search through the hyperparameter space for a large number of network architectures is therefore often not possible in reasonable time. Regarding absolute running times, let us consider a few examples.41 •The often-cited NCF (NeuMF) method (SectionA.3) needs four hours to train on one of our machines for the popular MovieLens1M dataset. Training the best-performing SLIM method on the same machine and dataset requires only 4 minutes. Interestingly, the more 39http://www.mymedialite.net/index.html. 40https://www.librec.net/. 41All reported measurements were made on the same hardware: one AWS instance p3.2xlarge, with 8 vCPU, 30 GB RAM, and one Tesla V100-SXM2-16 GB GPU. All deep-learning algorithms (with the exception of CDL) were trained using the GPU. All of our baselines were trained only on the CPUs. The detailed measurements are available in the online material (Section 3). ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 20 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:19 recentEASER methodhasbetteraccuracythanNeuMF,butonlyneedsabout12sfortrain- ing on the same machine. Training NeuMF on the slightly larger Pinterest dataset (1.5M interactions) took more than two days, which is again much higher when compared to the training times of SLIM (12 min) or EASER (2 min). •Similar observations can be made for the early CDL method (SectionA.1). On the larger CiteULike-a dataset with about 55k interactions, CDL needs almost two hours for train- ing, the EASER method 2 min, and our well-performing ItemKNN CFCBF hybrid less than 10 seconds to pre-compute the neighborhoods. •The Mult-VAE method (SectionA.2), which significantly outperformed our baselines on one dataset, seems to be also favorable over both baselines and other neural methods in termsoftrainingtimes.FortherelativelylargeMovieLens20Mdataset,trainingneedsabout 21 min on our machine. This is much faster than the SLIM algorithm, which needs almost two hours and was competitive with Mult-VAE on the other dataset. EASER,w h i c hi so n par or better than SLIM, is again favorable here, requiring only about 3 min for training. •ThealgorithmwiththelongesttrainingtimeonourmachineisDMF.Itsbestvariant,based on binary cross entropy, requires almost 5 days of training on the MovieLens1M dataset, while the simple iALS baseline, which outperforms DMF on all measures, requires only 4m i nof training. Limited scalability is not a methodological issue per se, and we do not argue that scalability necessarily has to be a main focus of academic researchers, in particular when it comes to new technical ideas and proposals. Once the ideas are assumed to be viable and effective, questions related to the practical deployment can be addressed in subsequent research, e.g., by using more shallow models that implement the same concepts. However,today’softenenormouscostsfortuningthebaselinesmaylureresearchersintotaking hyperparameter settings from previous papers—even though they were determined for different evaluation setups—and reuse them in their own experiments. Another possible consequence of thesometimeshighcomputationcostscanbethatresearchersoftendonotapplycross-validation procedures. Instead, they rather base their conclusions on one single train-test split of the data. For this reason, in many research works the statistical significance of the observed outcomes is not reported. Besides the general issues reported so far, we observed a number of further more technical is- sues.Theseincludeuncommonimplementationsofrankingmeasures,non-randomizeddatasplits, reporting best results across different epochs, and determining the best number of epochs on the test set. 5.3 Fundamental Issues Among the factors that may contribute to the apparent stagnation observed both in this study and in other fields [3, 46] are today’s incentive mechanisms in the academic system and our es- tablished research practices; see also Reference [42]. Regarding the incentive system, researchers are more and more evaluated based on the citations their works receive. This might lead to the phenomenon that researchers develop a tendency to investigate problems that are popular and (easily) “publishable” [72]. With the current strong interest in neural algorithms [39], papers that do not propose or use deep learning approaches might get criticized by reviewers for not using state-of-the-art technology. It therefore might appear much easier to publish a neural approach than other works, even though the true value of these complex models is not always fully clear. Furthermore, with the thinness of the reviewer pool, the “mathiness” of many papers [42]a n d ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 21 =====
20:20 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. the sheer amount of machine learning papers submitted every year, it becomes more and more difficult to identify those works that truly move the field forward. One particularly seductive aspect in the context of algorithmic works ontop-n recommenda- tionisthatthereisanimplicitgeneralagreementabouthowresearchinthisareashouldbedone. Unlike in other types of recommender systems research, e.g., research that involves user studies, the experimental offline evaluation design approach is generally pre-determined and is not ques- tioned.Generally,tohaveapaperacceptedatoneoftheprestigiousconferencesconsideredinthis article,onehasto(atleast)proposeanewtechnicalapproachthatoutperformssomestate-of-the- artmethodsononeevaluationprotocolandonatleastacoupleofestablishedmetricsandpublicly available datasets. Which dataset is used often seems arbitrary, and today’s papers in most cases do not motivate their work based on domain-specific considerations or an underlying theory.42 Researchersarealsoflexibleintermsoftheirevaluationmethod.Asdiscussedabove,variouspro- tocolvariantsandaccuracymeasuresareusedtoday,andinmostpaperstheselectionofmeasures isnotexplained.Finally,asdiscussedthroughoutthearticle,itisdifficulttoknowwhatrepresents the state-of-the-art in a certain area or for a specific subproblem. All these degrees of freedom make it very tempting for researchers to focus on accuracy im- provements fortop-n recommendation, where it is in some sense easy to “prove” progress and where no special research design has to be developed and argued for. However, the established researchmodel,asdiscussed,allowsforalotofarbitrariness.Forexample,anovelalgorithmmay be compared against a baseline using a number of accuracy metrics at different cut-off lengths on multiple datasets. The probability of finding some combinations of measures and datasets by which the novel algorithm seems to outperform the baseline increases with the number of cases examined [28]. Onlinemachinelearningcompetitionsashosted,e.g.,onKaggle, 43 representtheotherextreme. On Kaggle and also in specific recommender systems challenges, the dataset and the evaluation methodarepre-definedbytheorganizationrunningthecompetition.Furthermore,participantsdo notseethetestsetandusuallydonotmeasuretherecommendationqualitybythemselves,which avoids,aswehavediscoveredinourstudy,apotentialsourceofmistakes.Onetypicalcriticismof such online competitions is that they result in a “leaderboard chasing” culture, which can lead to limited innovation. Allinall,currentresearchpracticecaneasilycreateanillusionofprogressintermsofaccuracy improvements. But even when this progress is real, a further obstacle lies in us not even knowing withcertaintywhethertheseaccuracyimprovementswillleadtobetterrecommendationsinprac- tice, neither in terms of business value nor in terms of the quality perception by users. In fact, a numberofresearchworksindicatethatalgorithmswithhigherofflineaccuracydonotnecessarily lead to better perceived recommendation quality [4, 17, 27, 47, 59]. For this reason, recommender systemsresearchisdifferentfromotherareaslikeimagerecognitionornaturallanguageprocess- ing (e.g., automated translation), where accuracy improvements can often directly lead to better systems. This problem of focusing solely on accuracy optimization has actually been well known in the recommender systems community for many years [49], and the “hyper-focus on abstract metrics” is also common to other areas of applied machine learning research [72]. As shown in compara- tive evaluations like [44], however, there usuallyis no best model, and the ranking of algorithms depends on many factors like dataset characteristics or evaluation approach. While there is no doubt that being better able to predict the relevance of items for individual users is something 42See also Reference [35] for a satirical discussion of this general problem in machine learning. 43https:///www.kaggle.com. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 22 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:21 useful, considering only abstract accuracy measures appears to be a strong oversimplification of the problem. 5.4 Reproducibility and Progress: Guidelines and Best Practices The analyses in this article point to several common issues that may lead to limited reproducibil- ity and progress. Based on these observations, we provide a set of guidelines and best practices for algorithms research in recommender systems. The guidelines relate both to methodological aspects, i.e., how to ensure that progress is made, and publication aspects, i.e., which information shouldbereportedinresearchpapersandwhichmaterialsshouldbeprovidedpublicly.Moreover, weproviderecommendationsforjournaleditorsandconferencechairstoimprovereproducibility and progress in the discipline. 5.4.1 Methodology. Generally, researchers should select a wide, diverse and optimized set of baselines to reduce the chance of reporting progress that is only virtual. Include baselines algorithms from different families.In our results there was no in- dividual algorithm, or even no single family of algorithms (e.g., neighborhood-based, machine-learning,non-personalized),whichwassuperiortotheothersinallexperimen- talconfigurations.Therefore,researchersshouldstrivetoincludewell-optimizedbaseline algorithmsofdifferentfamiliesintheirexperimentsandnotlimitthemselvestoacertain class of algorithms, e.g., deep learning baselines. Systematically optimize all algorithms.All algorithms in the comparison must be opti- mizedforeachtesteddatasetandforthegivenevaluationprotocolandmetrics.Acompar- ison between optimized and non-optimized algorithms is meaningless. It cannot inform us if a new method advances the state of the art. The optimization must include all rel- evant parameters and all baselines, even the simplest, including, for example, theshrink termforneighborhood-basedapproaches,whichisknowntosometimesleadtosubstan- tial performance gains. Also the number of training epochs for learning approaches is a parameter to be tuned on validation data. Carefullychoosethehyperparameteroptimizationstrategy. Anotherissueweobserved for several papers but have not highlighted so far is that authors often do not report the details of the applied hyperparameter optimization strategy. The chosen strategy can, however, have a significant impact on the results. The commonly used Grid Search ap- proach has certain limitations, in particular that the results may be strongly affected by how the value ranges of continuous valued hyperparameters are discretized. Since even Random Search has shown to be often favorable over Grid search [6], the use of Random search or Bayesian strategies is recommended. 5.4.2 Reproducibility. AspointedoutbyCockburnetal.inReference[ 14],thepressuretopub- lish academic works encourages researchers to consciously or unconsciously adopt not well jus- tified methodologies—such as excluding certain users or items from the datasets—to make their findings look stronger. While such decisions can be entirely appropriate if properly motivated, engaging in selective reporting of results is not: flexible data analysis and selective reporting can dramatically increase the risk of only virtual progress. For example, if a researcher collects 10 accuracy metrics and only reports the significant ones (with significance level at 0.05), then the probability of reporting a progress that is only virtual jumps from 5% to 40%. While in principle a paper should contain all necessary information to reproduce the results, thisisoftenconflictingwiththespacelimitationsmostpublicationoutletsenforce.Thefollowing ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 23 =====
20:22 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. is a list of details that should be reported as a minimum in a paper and it is based onThe Machine Learning Reproducibility Checklist44 adopted, e.g., by NeurIPS ’18 and NeurIPS ’19: State underlying assumptions.The assumptions the model relies upon (e.g., data proper- ties) should be clearly stated and, when necessary, verified to be true for the evaluation setupathand.Forexample,theclaimthatinteractionmapsderivedfromtheouterprod- uctofembeddingsareequivalenttoimagesandthatCNNsallowtomodeltheembedding correlations(CoupledCF[ 79]andConvNCF[ 29])wasnotdirectlyverifiedintheoriginal articles and was later questioned by Ferrari Dacrema et al. [24]. Be clear about data pre-processing.All pre-processing steps should be described and the removal of data should be clearly motivated. In some of the articles we analyzed (DMF [77] and NeuRec [80]), pre-processing reduced the size of the dataset by more than 80%. Drastic subsampling of the dataset may entirely change its properties. Reporthyperparameteroptimizationdetails. Thearticleshouldeitherexplicitlymention or provide a reference to the range and distribution of each hyperparameter, and should report the method that was used to select them. This includes the number of epochs the model was trained for and early-stopping criteria. Given that small details in the implementation of complex models can matter a lot, what pub- lished in a paper alone is often not sufficient to ensure reproducibility of results. Therefore, it is important for authors to also provide a publicly available implementation. The following guide- lines are partially based on those adopted by NeurIPS.45 In essence, it should be made as easy as possible for other researchers to redo the experiments. Publish the source code of all models, including the baselines.We often observed in our analysis that researchers only published the core training and prediction routine of the newly proposed model. We could not find any article providing the source code for the baselines, when those were not already publicly available as part of other projects, and only few published the source code for both the pre-processing and splitting of the datasets (Mult-VAE [38] and NeuRec [80]). Providethedatasets. Theuseddatasets,orpointerstothem,shouldbepublished.Ifpossible, then the train and test splits should be published as well. Makethereproductioneasyforothers. Authorsshouldspecifyallsoftwarerequirements and dependencies of their software, including the specific version. Provide installation scripts and machine-readable dependency descriptions. It is also desirable to provide scripts that execute the entire experimental pipeline, from pre-processing, to training, evaluation, and collection of metrics. Use persistent repositories.Institutional repositories or DOIs should be preferred to per- sonal webpages, since the latter can have a much shorter lifespan making previously published links unavailable [70].46 5.4.3 Mitigation. Inthespiritofmitigatingthecurrentissuesinphantomprogress,ourrecom- mendationtojournaleditorsandconferencechairsistopromotesubmissionsreplicatingprevious 44https://www.cs.mcgill.ca/∼jpineau/ReproducibilityChecklist-v2.0.pdf. 45https://github.com/paperswithcode/releasing-research-code. 46For example, at the time of our analysis we found that the provided links to two datasets (Tafeng and Frappe) were not active anymore. We could only use these datasets, because other researchers had uploaded them independently as part of other publications. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 24 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:23 studies.Replicationsofstudiescontributetoelevateconfidenceandrobustnessinfindingsbeyond what is possible from a single study. However,themainobstacletoreproducibilitystudiesisapublicationbiasinwhichreproducibil- itypapersareacceptedforpublicationatamuchlowerratethanthoseprovidingnovelresults[ 14]. Therefore,weencourageeditorsandchairstoeducatereviewersontheresearchvalueofreplicat- ing previous studies. 6 CONCLUSION Our work reveals that despite the large number of new methods that are published on the topic of top-n recommendation every year, the progress in this field may actually seem limited, at least when considering the papers analyzed in this work. Our analysis shows that sometimes even rel- atively simple methods lead to performance levels that are similar or even better than the most recent complex neural methods. In other cases, the computationally expensive neural methods did not outperform well-established matrix factorization approaches or linear models. A number of issues contribute to the observed phenomena. We not only identified different methodological problems but also found that the choice of the baselines and often the lack of a proper optimiza- tionofthesebaselinesrepresentkeyissuesthathamperourprogress.Thesephenomenahowever are not specific to the domain of recommender systems or to neural approaches. In the context of theuseofdeeplearningtechniquesfortheimportant top-nrecommendationtask,ouranalysesin some ways indicate that the power of deep learning has not been leveraged yet to the full extent asitwasdoneinotherapplicationsareas.This,asaresult,leadstoanumberofavenuesforfuture research on neural methods for recommender systems. Increasing the reproducibility of published research was identified as one of possible strategies tomitigatesomeoftheobservedproblems.Intheinformationretrievalresearchcommunity,ques- tionsofreplicabilityandreproducibilityhaverecentlyreceivedmoreattention,probablythanksin parttothesurprisingresultsfromReferences[ 3,39,78].Anincreasedawarenessandcorrespond- ing initiatives are also advisable for the recommender systems community. However, even with betterreproducibility,fundamentalproblemsofalgorithms-basedrecommendersystemsresearch remain.Thereasonisthat,unlikeinsomeIRtasks,betterretrievalorpredictionperformancedoes not necessarily lead to recommendations that are better in terms of the users’ quality perception or in terms of the business value for providers. In the end, these problems lead to a certain stagnation of the research field. A large number of researchershuntforthe“best”model,eventhoughtherearemanyindicationsthatnosuchmodel exists,astheperformancerankingofalgorithmsdependsonmanyfactors.Overall,aparadigmatic shift is therefore required in terms of how we evaluate recommender systems. In the future, it is, however,notonlyimportanttoaddressthemethodologicalissuesobservedinthisarticle.Wealso should reconsider how much we can actually learn from offline experiments and computational accuracy measures alone. This, for example, calls for multi-method evaluation approaches that (i) consider the human in the loop and(ii) for research works that are more based on theoretical considerations than on network architecture engineering. APPENDIX A DETAILED ANALYSIS FOR REPRODUCIBLE ARTICLES In this part of the Appendix, we discuss the analyzed papers in more detail and provide selected numerical results. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 25 =====
20:24 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. A.1 Collaborative Deep Learning for Recommender Systems (CDL) Datasets. The evaluation in the original paper is based on three datasets. Two of them are data samples that were previously collected from theCiteULikeplatform and which were already used in earlier research. One dataset is based on rating data from the Netflix Prize competition, aug- mented with content information by the authors. In our evaluation, we considered only the Ci- teULike datasets, because the content information used in combination with the Netflix dataset is not publicly available. Two versions of the CiteULike dataset were considered, a dense ver- sion CiteULike-a and a sparser oneCiteULike-t. Both datasets are relatively small (135k and 205k interactions,respectively).Foreachofthesedatasets,experimentsweremadeintwosparsitycon- figurations. These configurations are described by a parameterP, which defines how many in- teractions per user are left in the training set (with the rest going to the test set). For parameter P, values 1 and 10 were reported, which correspond to 5.5k and 55.5k training interactions, re- s p e c t i v e l y .N o t et h a tw i t hP = 1 there is only one training interaction per user in the training dataset. Evaluation. Several baseline techniques were explored, among them a number of hybrid matrix factorizationapproaches,acontent-baseddeeplearningtechniquedesignedformusicrecommen- dation,aswellasCollaborativeTopicRegression,amethodcombiningLatentDirichletAllocation on the content and collaborative filtering on the interactions. For evaluation purposes,P interac- tions for each user were randomly sampled to be part of the training set as mentioned above. The averageresultsoffiveevaluationrunsarereported.TheauthorsreportRecallforcomparablylong list lengths (50 to 300), and Mean Average Precision for list length 300. Results and Discussion. The authors found their method to outperform all baselines on all mea- sures.We couldreproducetheirresultsbasedontheprovidedcode anddataset. 47 To optimize the baselines in our own evaluation, we used 20% of the training set as a validation set.48 After opti- mization, our results show that CDL—in three of four configurations (CiteULike-a withP=10 and CiteUlike-t withP=1 and P=10)—was consistently outperformed by our simple hybrid technique (ItemKNN CFCBF) and, in many cases, also by the pure content-based method (ItemKNN CBF). Only when removing all but one user interaction from the CiteULike-a dataset (withP=1)C D L was, by a large extent, better than any of our baselines. In particular, in the settings whereP=1, pure collaborative filtering techniques were, as expected, not competitive. Table 5 shows exemplary results for the CiteULike-a dataset (P=10), with about 55k interac- tions in the training dataset. Detailed results for all datasets can be found in the online appendix (Section3).Inthetable,wehighlightinboldthoseentrieswhereabaselineoutperformedCDL.We can observe that, for shorter and much more typical list lengths, even the simplest collaborative filteringapproachesoutperformCDL.TheiALSmethodbasedonmatrixfactorizationforimplicit feedback data was better with respect to CDL in all measurements and cutoff lengths. Finally, the best results were achieved with the pure content-based method that uses only item features to recommend similar items (ItenKNN CBF). 47In the source code the authors provided it is reported that the original evaluation contained an error such that the absolute values of the evaluation metrics was higher than the correct one, although the relative performance ordering of the algorithms remained unaltered. Once this error is fixed we can reproduce their results. 48Information about the validation set size was not provided in the original paper. In the evaluation scenario whereP=1, duetothepresenceofonly1traininginstanceperuser,anysamplingwouldresultincoldusers.Therefore,inthisscenario, the validation data is also contained in the train data. In the evaluation scenario whereP=10, training and validation data are disjoint. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 26 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:25 Table 5. Selected Results for the CDL Method on the CiteULike-a Dataset withP=10 REC@50 REC@100 REC@150 REC@200 REC@250 REC@300 TopPopular 0.0040 0.0078 0.0103 0.0204 0.0230 0.0258 UserKNN CF jaccard 0.0806 0.1207 0.1480 0.1705 0.1887 0.2034 ItemKNN CF cosine 0.0989 0.1441 0.1752 0.1982 0.2156 0.2300 P3α 0.0907 0.1341 0.1636 0.1865 0.2055 0.2206 RP3β49 0.0963 0.1408 0.1692 0.1908 0.2090 0.2239 EASER 0.0839 0.1253 0.1546 0.1797 0.1988 0.2128 SLIM 0.0876 0.1308 0.1583 0.1821 0.2005 0.2165 PureSVD 0.0715 0.1079 0.1313 0.1491 0.1636 0.1759 iALS 0.0779 0.1388 0.1834 0.2186 0.2472 0.2706 ItemKNN CBF cosine 0.1989 0.2835 0.3402 0.3844 0.4193 0.4492 ItemKNN CFCBF cosine 0.1858 0.2816 0.3445 0.3930 0.4335 0.4642 CDL 0.0580 0.1108 0.1546 0.1946 0.2314 0.2640 We highlight in bold those entries where a baseline outperforms CDL. From a methodological perspective, there is no indication of why comparably long list lengths were used for evaluation in the paper and why no measurements were reported for list lengths below 50, which is commonly the case in the literature. A.2 Collaborative Variational Autoencoder (CV AE) DatasetsandEvaluation .TheCVAEmethodisevaluatedinthesamewayastheCDLapproach,i.e., twodatasetsfrom CiteULIkeareusedanddifferentsparsityconfigurationsareevaluated.Likewise, the authors of CVAE measure Recall at different (long) list lengths. As an additional baseline, the authors include the CDL [73] method described in the previous section. The hyperparameters for all baseline methods were optimized using a validation set that is, however, not described. ResultsandEvaluation .WecouldreproducetheresultsforCVAE. 50 Table6showstheresultsof ourexperimentsfortheCiteULike-adatasetwith P=10,againusingthesameevaluationmeasures and protocol as used in the original paper. The baseline results shown in Table6 are identical to those of Table5—as they were done on the same dataset and with the same evaluation protocol—except that Table6 has an additional rowfortheresultsfortheCVAEmethod.Again,thesimplehybridbaselinesoutperformthemore complex CVAE method on all measures on this dataset. We can, however, observe that CVAE is indeed consistently better than the CDL method, which is the main baseline method in Reference [37].Fortheotherdatasetandsparsityconfigurations,ourresultsaresimilartowhatwasreported in the previous section on CDL. Overall, the authors of CVAE could show an advance with respect to CDL, but our results in- dicate that CDL did not represent a strong baseline method. In the remainder of this article, we willobservethefollowingphenomenonseveraltimes:aneuralmethodisintroducedasimproving the state-of-the-art, and subsequent works only focus on outperforming this new neural method, without considering alternative baselines. 49We report RP3β[54] for completeness although the DL algorithm we evaluate here predates its publication. 50In the source code the authors provided it is reported that the original evaluation contained an error such that the absolute values of the evaluation metrics was higher than the correct one, although the relative performance ordering of the algorithms remained unaltered. Once this error is fixed, we can reproduce their results. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 27 =====
20:26 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. Table 6. Experimental Results for the CVAE Method for the CiteULike-a withP=10 REC@50 REC@100 REC@150 REC@200 REC@250 REC@300 TopPopular 0.0040 0.0078 0.0103 0.0204 0.0230 0.0258 UserKNN CF jaccard 0.0806 0.1207 0.1480 0.1705 0.1887 0.2034 ItemKNN CF cosine 0.0989 0.1441 0.1752 0.1982 0.2156 0.2300 P3α 0.0907 0.1341 0.1636 0.1865 0.2055 0.2206 RP3β51 0.0963 0.1408 0.1692 0.1908 0.2090 0.2239 EASER 0.0839 0.1253 0.1546 0.1797 0.1988 0.2128 SLIM 0.0876 0.1308 0.1583 0.1821 0.2005 0.2165 PureSVD 0.0715 0.1079 0.1313 0.1491 0.1636 0.1759 iALS 0.0779 0.1388 0.1834 0.2186 0.2472 0.2706 ItemKNN CBF cosine 0.1989 0.2835 0.3402 0.3844 0.4193 0.4492 ItemKNN CFCBF cosine 0.1858 0.2816 0.3445 0.3930 0.4335 0.4642 CVAE 0.0805 0.1569 0.2232 0.2760 0.3250 0.3687 CDL 0.0580 0.1108 0.1546 0.1946 0.2314 0.2640 We highlight in bold those entries where a baseline outperforms CVAE. A.3 Neural Collaborative Filtering (NCF) Datasets.Twodatasetswereusedforevaluatingthemethod,oneratingdatasetfromMovieLens (MovieLens1M)52 and one dataset with implicit feedback fromPinterest.53 The Pinterest dataset was pre-processed by removing all users with less than 20 interactions. After pre-processing, the dataset contained 1.5 million interactions. For the MovieLens rating dataset, all 1 million ratings were transformed to 1 to mimic an implicit-feedback dataset, with missing entries transformed to 0. Evaluation. The authors use a leave-last-out procedure to evaluate their method. For each user, the last interaction (based on its timestamp) is put into the test set. The resulting data splits used in the experiments are shared by the authors. To avoid to compute scores for all recommendable items, which is considered too time-consuming by the authors even for datasets of modest size, theperformanceofthealgorithmsismeasuredbydetermininghowthelasthiddenitemisranked within other 100 randomly sampled items. Hit Rate (HR) and NDCG at list length 10 are used as performance metrics [79]. Aspersonalizedbaselines,theauthorsincludeMatrixFactorizationwithBayesianPersonalized Ranking (BPR) matrix factorization, the eALS method from 2016 and the ItemKNN method. The original hyperparameter optimization is done on a validation set obtained by randomly selecting one interaction per user. For the ItemKNN method, the number of neighbors was varied, but no otherconfigurationsweretestedbytheauthors(e.g.,shrinktermornormalization).Accordingto the reported experiments, the NCF method, and in particular the NeuMF variant, outperforms all baselines on all dataset on all performance measures. Results and Discussion. We could reproduce the reported results. However, the analysis of the provided source code shows that the number of training epochs was chosen by maximising the Hit Rate on the test data. Since the number of epochs is a parameter like any other, it must be fixed before testing, e.g., through early stopping on a validation set. In our experiments, for each 51We report RP3β[54] for completeness although the DL algorithm we evaluate here predates its publication. 52https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/. 53https://sites.google.com/site/xueatalphabeta/academic-projects. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 28 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:27 Table 7. Experimental Results for NCF (MovieLens 1M) HR@1 NDCG@1 HR@5 NDCG@5 HR@10 NDCG@10 TopPopular 0.1051 0.1051 0.3048 0.2064 0.4533 0.2542 UserKNN CF asymmetric 0.1921 0.1921 0.5070 0.3546 0.6768 0.4100 ItemKNN CF asymmetric 0.1843 0.1843 0.4906 0.3400 0.6627 0.3956 P3α 0.1791 0.1791 0.4846 0.3352 0.6460 0.3876 RP3β54 0.1836 0.1836 0.4935 0.3419 0.6758 0.4011 EASER 0.2225 0.2225 0.5629 0.3986 0.7192 0.4494 SLIM 0.2207 0.2207 0.5576 0.3953 0.7162 0.4468 PureSVD 0.2132 0.2132 0.5339 0.3783 0.6937 0.4303 iALS 0.2106 0.2106 0.5505 0.3862 0.7109 0.4382 NCF (NeuMF variant) 0.2088 0.2088 0.5411 0.3803 0.7093 0.4349 We highlight in bold those entries where a baseline outperforms NCF. Table 8. Experimental Results for NCF (Pinterest) HR@1 NDCG@1 HR@5 NDCG@5 HR@10 NDCG@10 TopPopular 0.0467 0.0467 0.1665 0.1064 0.2740 0.1409 UserKNN CF jaccard 0.2898 0.2898 0.7038 0.5056 0.8655 0.5583 ItemKNN CF asymmetric 0.2903 0.2903 0.7117 0.5096 0.8766 0.5633 P3α 0.2853 0.2853 0.7022 0.5024 0.8700 0.5571 RP3β54 0.2966 0.2966 0.7151 0.5149 0.8796 0.5685 EASER 0.2909 0.2909 0.7070 0.5077 0.8684 0.5604 SLIM 0.2913 0.2913 0.7059 0.5072 0.8679 0.5601 PureSVD 0.2630 0.2630 0.6628 0.4706 0.8268 0.5241 iALS 0.2811 0.2811 0.7144 0.5061 0.8761 0.5590 NCF (NeuMF variant) 0.2801 0.2801 0.7101 0.5029 0.8777 0.5576 We highlight in bold those entries where a baseline outperforms NCF. algorithm(includingNCF),wethereforereporttheperformancemeasureforthenumberofepochs that was considered optimal based on the validation set. Tables7 and 8 report our results for both the MovieLens and Pinterest datasets. We report the results for list length 10, as in the original paper. Since the authors in Reference [30] also plot the results at different list lengths from 1 to 10, we also include measurements at list lengths 1 and 5 for comparison purposes. On the well-known MovieLens dataset (Table7), NeuMF was competitive against the simple baselines, however was outperformed by all but one non-neural machine learning methods. On the Pinterest dataset (Table8), NeuMF could only outperform PureSVD, which is not optimized for implicit feedback datasets. Most non-neural machine learning techniques, were often either similar or better than NeuMF.55 These findings have been confirmed in a recent article by Rendle 54We report RP3β[54] for completeness although the DL algorithm we evaluate here predates its publication. 55It shall be noted here that after the first publication of our results [23], the authors of NeuMF provided us with an alter- native configuration of their method, which included new hyperparameter values taken from alternative hyperparameter ranges,andrequiringotherslightchangesinthetrainingprocedure.Whilethisnewconfigurationledtoslightlyimproved results for their method, the results of our analysis were confirmed. In this context, we would like to clarify that for all neuralmethodsinvestigatedherebetterconfigurationsthanthosereportedintheoriginalpapersmayindeedexist.Finding such configurations, e.g., in the form of better hyperparameter ranges or alternative network structures, is, however, not ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 29 =====
20:28 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. et al. [56], which discussed the problem of learning a dot product with multilayer perceptrons. The article shows that this is not a trivial task and that the computation cost of using a neural model can be unpractical for production environments where efficient algorithms based on the dot product are available. As a side observation, we can see that machine learning methods were clearly favorable over simple techniques for the MovieLens dataset. For the Pinterest dataset, however, it turns out that this advantage diminishes—at least in this experiment—and that a well-tuned ItemKNN method led to similar and sometimes better performance than machine learning techniques. A.4 Deep Matrix Factorization (DMF) Datasets. Experiments were made on four public datasets: the two smallest MovieLens datasets (100kand1M),56 andtwopubliclyavailabledatasetscollectedfromAmazon.com(forthe Movieand Musicdomains).57 Alldatasetscontainratingsona1to5scale.Thedatasetswerepre-processed(if needed) so that there were at least 20 ratings for each user. Furthermore,for the Amazon datasets only, items were considered for which more than 5 ratings existed. The Amazon Music data set that resulted from the pre-processing step was shared by the au- thors. It however contains users with less than 20 interactions and items with less than 5 ratings. Therefore, it remains unclear how exactly the filtering was done. To keep the results presented in this article consistent across datasets, we have pre-processed all datasets—including Amazon Music—asdescribedintheoriginalpaper,andwehavenotusedtheAmazonMusicdatasetshared bytheauthors.WealsorunourexperimentsontheAmazonMusicdatasetsharedbytheauthors: the relative performance between baselines and DMF (not reported here) do not change with re- spect to the results reported here. Evaluation. The evaluation procedure isleave-last-out similar to the one used for the NCF method. For each user, the last interaction (based on its timestamp) is held out and ranked to- gether with 99 negative (non-interacted) random items.58 The Hit Rate and NDCG at list length 10 are used as metrics. The data splits that were used in the experiments were not shared by the authors; therefore, we created data splits based on the information in the paper. Aspersonalizedbaselines,theauthorsconsiderNCF[ 30]aswellasthebaselinesreportedinthat article, i.e., eALS and ItemKNN. However, the authors used NCF with binarized feedback, while DMFusedexplicitfeedback.Hyperparametersforthemachinelearningmethodsweretunedona validation set built from the training set by randomly sampling one interaction per user, and the authorsreportthateALSandNCFweretunedasintheoriginalpapers.FortheItemKNNmethod, no details about neighborhood sizes or the used similarity function are provided. Results and Discussion. We reproduced the experiments reported by the authors based on the code that was provided to us upon request. We ran DMF with both loss functions that were also evaluated in the paper but could not confirm that the normalized versionnce leads to accuracy improvements over the binary versionbc. Our results however revealed that for three of four datasets one of the simple baselines outperformed DMF on both measures. Table 9 shows the results for the MovieLens datasets, which are among the most often used ones in the literature. The results obtained by DMF are better than traditional nearest-neighbor thegoalofourwork.Instead,ourgoalsaretoassessthereproducibilityofexistingworksandtocomparethebestreported results against existing baseline techniques. 56https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/. 57http://jmcauley.ucsd.edu/data/amazon/. 58The paper reports that 100 negative items are used, as described for NCF. However, the source code provided by the authors uses 99 negative items. In our experiments, we have used 99 negative items. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 30 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:29 Table 9. Experimental Results for DMF for the MovieLens1M (Left) and MovieLens100k (Right) Datasets HR@10 NDCG@10 TopPopular 0.4418 0.2475 UserKNN CF asymmetric 0.6324 0.3779 ItemKNN CF cosine 0.6347 0.3808 P3α 0.6097 0.3639 RP3β59 0.6304 0.3726 EASER 0.6693 0.4100 SLIM 0.6825 0.4209 PureSVD 0.6570 0.4015 iALS 0.6947 0.4257 DMF nce 0.6266 0.3768 DMF bc 0.6731 0.4033 HR@10 NDCG@10 TopPopular 0.4145 0.2342 UserKNN CF asymmetric 0.5994 0.3492 ItemKNN CF tversky 0.6026 0.3506 P3α 0.5717 0.3421 RP3β59 0.5685 0.3270 EASER 0.6089 0.3571 SLIM 0.6238 0.3765 PureSVD 0.5877 0.3555 iALS 0.6142 0.3691 DMFnce 0.5930 0.3410 DMFbc 0.6026 0.3623 We highlight in bold those entries where a baseline outperforms DMF. Table10. ExperimentalResultsforDMFfortheAmazonMusic(Left)andAmazonMovies(Right)Datasets HR@10 NDCG@10 TopPopular 0.5308 0.3037 UserKNN CF cosine 0.6694 0.4798 ItemKNN CF cosine 0.6647 0.4880 P3α 0.6588 0.4823 RP3β59 0.6754 0.4912 EASER 0.6600 0.4836 SLIM 0.6469 0.4744 PureSVD 0.5912 0.4190 iALS 0.6600 0.4880 DMF nce 0.4799 0.3371 DMF bc 0.6659 0.4815 HR@10 NDCG@10 TopPopular 0.5794 0.3489 UserKNN CF cosine 0.7327 0.5132 ItemKNN CF asymmetric 0.6986 0.4914 P3α 0.6972 0.5028 RP3β59 0.7107 0.5078 EASER -- SLIM 0.6981 0.5005 PureSVD 0.6021 0.4156 iALS 0.7352 0.5230 DMFnce 0.6832 0.4677 DMFbc 0.7818 0.5417 EASER resultsforAmazonMoviesaremissing,becausethecoderequiredtoomuchmemory.Wehighlightinboldthose entries where a baseline outperforms DMF. baselines on the MovieLens1M dataset, but slightly worse than those obtained with the iALS and SLIM.ForthesmallerMovieLens100kdataset,theobservedrankingisgenerallysimilarandagain iALS and SLIM outperform DMF on both measures. The detailed results for the Amazon datasets are shown in Table10. The results for EASER are missing for the Amazon Movies dataset, as the author-provided Python implementation of the method needed too much memory. For the Amazon Music dataset it is interesting to observe that the simple UserKNN and RP3βmethods work better here than other machine learning models, and also better than DMF. For the Amazon Movies dataset, the DMF method was actually much better than all other methods on both measures. In particular the gains in terms of the Hit Rate are substantial and much higher than the second best method iALS. Like for the case of CDL and the CVAE methods described in SectionsA.1 and A.2, a better performance could only be observed for one of the datasets. In the case of CDL and CVAE better 59We report RP3β[54] for completeness although the DL algorithm we evaluate here predates its publication. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 31 =====
20:30 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. resultswereobtainedforverysparsedatasetswithonlyonetraininginteractionperuser.Looking attheAmazonMoviesdatasetcharacteristicsinthecontextoftheDMFmethod,wecanseethatit is extremely sparse after the pre-processing step, in which 80% of the interactions were removed. Intheend,thereare878kremaininginteractionsforover80kmovies.TheAmazonMusicdataset isevensparser.Afterthepre-processingstep,whichremovesmorethan94%oftheinteractions,it has only 46k interactions for 18k items. Further investigations are necessary to better understand why DMF works so well in this case, which could help us design algorithms that also work well on other datasets with similar characteristics. Regarding methodological aspects, we found that the authors reported the best Hit Rate and NDCG results across different epochs. We therefore report the numbers here that were obtained after determining a suitable number of epochs on the validation set. In that context, the provided code shows that the authors sample different negative items to be used for testing in each train- ing epoch. This seems questionable as well, in particular when considered in combination of the practice of reporting the best value for each metric across epochs. In our experiments, we use the same negative item set for all evaluations. From a conceptual perspective, the authors argue that they combine implicit feedback and ex- plicit feedback in their approach. While this might be true in some interpretation, the authors mainly rely on the explicit ratings and add zeros to the empty matrix cells. Furthermore, when comparing their method with NCF, they only fed the binarized data to NCF, even though this method could deal with explicit rating data as well. A.5 Variational Autoencoders for Collaborative Filtering (Mult-V AE) Datasets. The authors use three datasets for evaluation. The first two datasets contain explicit feedback in the form of movie ratings (MovieLens20M60 and Netflix61). The third dataset contains play counts for musical tracks. All datasets are binarized. For the movie datasets, ratings higher than three are considered positive signals and only users with more than five interactions are retained.Forthemusicdataset,userswithmorethan20interactionsareretained;tracksthatwere listedlessthan200timesarefilteredout.Afterpre-processing,thedatasetsarestillrelativelylarge, having between 10 and almost 57 millions interactions.62 Evaluation. Four machine learning models are used as baselines, iALS, SLIM, NCF [30]( s e e SectionA.3)andtheCollaborativeDenoisingAutoencoder(CDAE)methodproposedinReference [75] in 2016. For evaluation purposes,the datasets are split into training, validation and test splits by holding out users. For instance, for the MovieLens20M dataset (136k users overall), 10k users are removed for validation and 10k users are removed for testing. For each hold-out user, 80% of the interactions are used as user profile, and the remaining 20% are used as ground truth to measure the performance metrics. The models are optimized for NDCG@100 on the validation set. Performance results for Recall@20 and Recall@50 are reported as well. Note that to be able to use matrix factorization baselines on cold users we built the cold users’ latent factors based upon both their user profile and the latent factors of the warm items. In par- ticular, we added a hyperparameter to the matrix factorization models to select how those cold user’slatentfactorsareestimated,eitherviaanitem-basedsimilarityoranitemembeddingsaver- age;seeReference[ 18].Thefirstcaseisinspir edbythe folding-intechnique[62]forthePureSVD model. It can be mathematically derived that PureSVD has an equivalent ItemKNN formulation, 60https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/. 61https://www.kaggle.com/netflix-inc/netflix-prize-data. 62Wedidnotrunexperimentsforthemusicdatasetastheoriginalpaperdidnotcontainsufficientinformationtoguarantee we used the dataset in the exact same way as the authors. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 32 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:31 Table 11. Results for Mult-VAE for the MovieLens20M Dataset REC@20 NDCG@20 REC@50 NDCG@50 REC@100 NDCG@100 TopPopular 0.1441 0.1201 0.2320 0.1569 0.3296 0.1901 UserKNN - - - - - - ItemKNN CF asymmetric 0.2937 0.2444 0.4486 0.3087 0.5709 0.3527 P3α 0.2620 0.2168 0.4047 0.2742 0.5287 0.3182 RP3β 0.3006 0.2501 0.4540 0.3133 0.5797 0.3583 EASER 0.3530 0.3074 0.5147 0.3755 0.6353 0.4196 SLIM 0.3356 0.2920 0.4893 0.3576 0.6110 0.4017 PureSVD 0.2935 0.2514 0.4371 0.3117 0.5544 0.3538 iALS 0.2968 0.2496 0.4406 0.3090 0.5631 0.3521 Mult-VAE 0.3541 0.2988 0.5222 0.3690 0.6517 0.4158 UserKNN could not be applied because of the evaluation protocol (hold-out of users). We highlight in bold those entries where a baseline outperforms Mult-VAE. Table 12. Results for Mult-VAE for the Netflix Dataset REC@20 NDCG@20 REC@50 NDCG@50 REC@100 NDCG@100 TopPopular 0.0786 0.0762 0.1643 0.1159 0.2717 0.1570 U s e r K N N ----- - ItemKNN CF cosine 0.2091 0.1970 0.3387 0.2592 0.4598 0.3092 P3α 0.1960 0.1759 0.3325 0.2412 0.4633 0.2962 RP3β 0.2210 0.2053 0.3633 0.2739 0.4932 0.3281 EASER 0.2681 0.2591 0.4170 0.3334 0.5471 0.3890 SLIM 0.2555 0.2479 0.4002 0.3203 0.5299 0.3752 PureSVD 0.2271 0.2184 0.3593 0.2840 0.4784 0.3342 iALS 0.1956 0.1839 0.3138 0.2410 0.4216 0.2862 Mult-VAE 0.2615 0.2423 0.4127 0.3167 0.5456 0.3730 UserKNNcouldnotbeappliedbecauseoftheevaluationprotocol(hold-outofusers).Wehighlightinboldthoseentries where a baseline outperforms Mult-VAE. in which the similarity matrix is the product of the items’ latent factor matrix by its transpose. In this case a further parameter is introduced to control the number of neighbors, as in the other neighborhood-basedmethods.Inthesecondcasethelatentfactorsofauseraretheproductofthe user profile and the items’ latent factors, resulting in the average of the embeddings of the items the user interacted with. Both methods proved effective. Results and Discussion. Using the code, the data splits and information about the seed for the random number generator that the authors provided, we could reproduce the results from the paper. In the original paper NDCG@100 is used as an optimization goal, however no reason is provided for this, as well as why Recall@20 and Recall@50 are used as additional measures, but not,e.g.,Recall@100.Toobtainamorecomprehensivepicture,wemadeadditionalmeasurements atthecorrespondingbutmissingcut-offvalues:Recall@100,NDCG@20andNDCG@50.Table 11 shows our results for the MovieLens20M dataset and Table12 those for the Netflix data. FortheMovieLensdataset,weobservedapositiveresultandcouldconfirmtheclaimsmadeby the authors of Mult-VAE. On all measurements, both the original and the additional ones, Mult- VAE leads to better performance results than all baseline methods that were available at the time ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 33 =====
20:32 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. thealgorithmwasproposed.SLIMisthesecondbestmethodinthisevaluation,withperformance results that are around 1% to 2% lower in terms of the NDCG. For the Netflix dataset, the claims of the authors could not be confirmed to the full extent. In termsofNDCG,whichistheoptimizationcriterion,SLIMoutperformsMult-VAEatalllistlengths. Mult-VAE is however better in terms of Recall. Overall, with Mult-VAE a method was found that was easy to reproduce, thanks to all needed material being made by the authors publicly available. Furthermore, as our results indicated, the methodconsistentlyoutperformedpreviousmethodsatleastononewell-knownandcomparably large dataset. We could also confirm that EASER leads to improvements over Mult-VAE in most cases, supporting the claim that shallow models are a competitive solution. A.6 NeuRec: On Nonlinear Transformation for Personalized Ranking Datasets. The authors use four public datasets for their evaluations (MovieLens1M,63 HetRec,64 FilmTrust,65 Frappe66).Threeofthemcontainmovieratings,whicharebinarizedbyconvertingall ratings to 1 and the missing entries to 0. The largest dataset (MovieLens1M) comprises 1 million interactions. The fourth dataset (Frappe) is from the domain of mobile app recommendation and contains about 100k interactions, reduced to 20k after pre-processing, which consisted of the re- moval of multiple interactions between the same user-item pairs. Data splits were not provided online but could be reproduced based on the information in the paper. Evaluation.Theauthorsusefiverandomtraining-testsplits(80%/20%)forevaluationandreport the average results. As performance metrics, the authors use Precision and Recall at list lengths 5 and 10, as well as Mean Average Precision, MRR, and the NDCG, at list length 10. As non-trivial baselines, the authors consider SLIM, BPR matrix factorization, NeuMF and the GMFmodel,whichispartofNCF[ 30].Informationabouthyperparametertuningforthebaselines is not provided except for GMF and NeuMF, which are said to use the “default” configuration as described in the original article. Hyperparameters for NeuRec were determined through grid searchandthefinallyusedvaluesarereportedinthepaperindetail.Thenumberoftrainingepochs is not reported in the paper.67 As usual, we selected the number of epochs via early stopping on a validation split. Results and Discussion. Even though the authors published a runnable implementation of their methodandprovideddetailedinformationonthehyperparameters,wecould notobtaintheresults reported in the original paper. We contacted the authors, but we were not able to reconstruct an experimental pipeline (from pre-processing to hyperparameter optimization) that led to results that were comparable to the ones reported in the original paper. In the end, the reason for this discrepancycouldnot beclarified.Theoutcome ofour evaluationis thatNeuRecis outperformed on any data set and almost on any measure by at least one, but usually several, of the baselines in our comparison. Sincethedetailedresultsarecomprehensive,giventhenumberofdatasetsandevaluationmea- sures, we only provide in Table13 the results for the most commonly used MovieLens1M dataset andforlistlengths5and10.Allotherresultscanagainbefoundintheonlineappendix(Section 3). 63https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/. 64https://grouplens.org/datasets/hetrec-2011/. 65https://www.librec.net/datasets/filmtrust.zip. 66Theoriginaldownloadlinkwasnotactiveanymoreatthetimeorouranalysis.Weprovideanalternativedownloadlink https://github.com/hexiangnan/neural_factorization_machine/archive/master.zip. 67According to an exchange of emails with the authors, the training was done for a large number of epochs and the best performance values on the test set were reported. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 34 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:33 Table 13. Experimental Results for NeuRec for the MovieLens1M Dataset @5 @10 PREC REC MAP NDCG MRR PREC REC MAP NDCG MRR TopPopular 0.2105 0.0402 0.1531 0.0689 0.3621 0.1832 0.0685 0.1168 0.0939 0.3793 UserKNN CF asymmetric 0.4212 0.1065 0.3441 0.1674 0.6399 0.3617 0.1726 0.2774 0.2230 0.6509 ItemKNN CF asymmetric 0.3995 0.0984 0.3244 0.1563 0.6179 0.3452 0.1590 0.2618 0.2084 0.6293 P3α 0.4041 0.1007 0.3286 0.1596 0.6250 0.3456 0.1627 0.2627 0.2121 0.6362 RP3β 0.4080 0.1007 0.3325 0.1602 0.6260 0.3508 0.1639 0.2676 0.2137 0.6374 EASER 0.4488 0.1134 0.3717 0.1779 0.6620 0.3857 0.1820 0.3035 0.2364 0.6717 SLIM 0.4437 0.1106 0.3692 0.1749 0.6578 0.3813 0.1770 0.3003 0.2321 0.6679 PureSVD 0.4123 0.0987 0.3371 0.1586 0.6266 0.3575 0.1624 0.2722 0.2132 0.6380 iALS 0.4164 0.1036 0.3373 0.1635 0.6327 0.3628 0.1702 0.2743 0.2200 0.6443 INeuRec 0.3280 0.0663 0.2554 0.1110 0.5003 0.2839 0.1094 0.2027 0.1500 0.5129 UNeuRec 0.2098 0.0395 0.1560 0.0684 0.3663 0.1856 0.0688 0.1199 0.0944 0.3852 We highlight in bold those entries where a baseline outperforms NeuRec. Looking at the results, we observe that on the MovieLens dataset even the simplest baselines are better than NeuRec and that the performance of the best baselines is better by a large margin. For the HetRec and FilmTrust datasets (not shown in detail here), the picture is mostly the same. Finally, for the small and rarely used Frappe dataset, NeuRec actually leads to the best results for Precision@5, but is outperformed, e.g., by RP3βon all other measures.68 Regarding methodological aspects, we found again that researchers optimized the number of epochsonthetestsetandapparentlyreportedthebestresultsofNeuRecfordifferentmeasuresat, potentially,differenttrainingepochs.Furthermore,itisunclearfromthepaperifhyperparameter optimization was done for the baselines. For the NCF method, the authors state that they used the “configuration” proposed in the original paper, but it is unclear if this refers to the network structure, the hyperparameters, or both. A.7 CoupledCF: Learning Explicit and Implicit User-item Couplings Datasets.Experimentsweremadeontwopublicdatasets,the MovieLens1M69 ratingdatasetand adatasetcalled Tafeng70 containinggrocerystoretransactions.TheTafengdatasethasabout750k transactions(i.e.,lessthantheMovieLens1Mdataset),butismuchmoresparseasitcontainsmany more users and items. The explicit ratings in the MovieLens1M dataset are transformed into bi- nary ratings, where each rating is considered as a positive interaction. Both datasets contain side information about users and items that is used by the CoupledCF algorithm. Therefore, we have included item-based and user-based content techniques among the baselines. The authors of the paper provided us with the train-test splits, including the sampled test negative items they had used during the evaluation. Evaluation. A leave-one-out procedure is used, where for each user one random interaction is put in the test set. For evaluating the performance, 99 items are sampled for which there was no interaction for the given user. The 100 items are then ranked by the algorithm and the Hit Rate 68We point out that the Frappe dataset is very small and exhibits very unstable results depending on the random split. In particular, compared to the results reported in the original paper, our TopPopular algorithm exhibits results that are four times higher; also NeuRec’s values are two times higher. 69https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/. 70Theoriginaldownloadlinkwasnotactiveanymoreatthetimeorouranalysis.Weprovideanalternativedownloadlink https://www.kaggle.com/chiranjivdas09/ta-feng-grocery-dataset. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 35 =====
20:34 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. and the NDCG are used to evaluate the performance. Cut-off list lengths between 1 and 10 were considered. Thehyperparametersoftheproposedmodelweresystematicallyfine-tunedbytheauthors.In- formationabouthyperparametertuningforthebaselinesisnotprovided.Theconsideredbaselines include NCF [30], and Google’s Wide&Deep method. From the original source code, we observed that the authors reported the best results for each metric on the test data across different epochs. Sincethisisinappropriate,wereportthevaluesofthemetricsaftertheoptimalnumberofepochs is chosen with early stopping on the validation set. Results and Discussion. We could not fully reproduce the results by the authors based on the providedcodeanddatasplits.Differentvariationsoftheproposedmodelweretestedintheoriginal paper. We used the best-performing one (CoupledCF) in our experiments as well as their simplest variant(DeepCF),wheretheformeristheonlyoneforwhichwecouldfullyreproducetheresults. Since there were some apparent issues regarding the way the authors did the sampling, which we discuss below, we recreated the train-test splits according to the descriptions in the paper. We also used a validation set for hyperparameter tuning. While the numerical results obtained using the split provided by the original authors and the one generated by us are different, the relative orderingofthealgorithmsintermsoftheirrecommendationqualityremainsthesame.Wereport the results obtained on the data split generated by us. As previously mentioned, we observe there were some apparent issues regarding the way the authors sampled the negative items. For both Movielens and Tafeng the negative item data contains duplicates leading to many users (72% for Movielens,28%forTafeng)havinglessofthedesired99negativeitems,e.g.,somehaveonly93.For theTafengdataset,cumulatively,almost3,000negativeitems(0.1%ofthetotalnumberofnegative items)alsoappearedastrainitemsortestitemsforthatsameuser.Ifthenumberofuniquenegative items is not constant, then different users will be evaluated underslightly different conditions, in particular,therecommendationproblembecomeseasierasthenumberofnegativesdecreasesdue to the reduction in the pool of alternatives the recommender has to choose from. We nonetheless assume that the impact of these inconsistencies will generally be small, since both the original split and the one generated by us exhibit the same ranking of the algorithms in terms of their performance. More strikingly, however, for 8% of the users in the Tafeng dataset, we observed problems regarding the usefulness of the test data. Some of these users have a test item but no negative items, meaning that there is only a single item that can be ranked and even a random recommender will exhibit perfect recommendations. Other users have negative items but no test item, meaning that no correct recommendations are possible. Our experimental results are shown in Table14(MovieLens) and Table15(Tafeng). For the MovieLens datasets, we can observe that CoupledCF is almost consistently able to outperform the simple neighborhood-based methods and the hybrids (except for very short list lengths). However, relatively simple non-neural methods like iALS and EASER are consistently better than CoupledCF. The differences between the CoupledCF and the DeepCF variant are tiny and the simpler DeepCF is sometimes even better. This stands in contrast to the results in the original article, where the differences were large. FortheTafengdataset,eventhenearest-neighbormethodsoutperformCoupledCFbyfar.Only the pure content-based baselines do not reach the performance level of CoupledCF. Generally, on this dataset, the performance of the proposed method is at the level of the TopPopular baseline. The simpler DeepCF method also leads to better accuracy results than the CoupledCF variant. Looking at methodological aspects, it seems that the baselines were not properly optimized and default hyperparameters were used. Furthermore, from the provided code it seems that the number of epochs was determined on the test set, as was done in other papers examined in this ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 36 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:35 Table 14. Experimental Results for CoupledCF for the MovieLens1M Dataset HR@1 NDCG@1 HR@5 NDCG@5 HR@10 NDCG@10 TopPopular 0.1593 0.1593 0.4217 0.2936 0.5813 0.3451 UserKNN CF asymmetric 0.3546 0.3546 0.6914 0.5343 0.8114 0.5735 ItemKNN CF cosine 0.3305 0.3305 0.6682 0.5080 0.7940 0.5488 P3α 0.3316 0.3316 0.6543 0.5031 0.7687 0.5402 RP3β 0.3464 0.3464 0.6743 0.5198 0.7959 0.5591 EASER 0.4003 0.4003 0.7258 0.5738 0.8343 0.6093 SLIM 0.3906 0.3906 0.7116 0.5625 0.8315 0.6014 PureSVD 0.3735 0.3735 0.7088 0.5522 0.8132 0.5861 iALS 0.3816 0.3816 0.7121 0.5581 0.8200 0.5933 ItemKNN CBF asymmetric 0.0884 0.0884 0.2586 0.1752 0.3780 0.2137 UserKNN CBF tversky 0.1714 0.1714 0.4427 0.3108 0.6065 0.3636 ItemKNN CFCBF cosine 0.3328 0.3328 0.6694 0.5107 0.7985 0.5526 UserKNN CFCBF dice 0.3555 0.3555 0.6869 0.5328 0.8008 0.5698 DeepCF 0.3550 0.3550 0.7017 0.5388 0.8272 0.5794 CoupledCF 0.3522 0.3522 0.7018 0.5374 0.8247 0.5775 We highlight in bold those entries where a baseline outperforms CoupledCF. Table 15. Experimental Results for CoupledCF for the Tafeng Dataset HR@1 NDCG@1 HR@5 NDCG@5 HR@10 NDCG@10 TopPopular 0.2654 0.2654 0.5194 0.3965 0.6549 0.4402 UserKNN CF cosine 0.3215 0.3215 0.5412 0.4369 0.6415 0.4693 ItemKNN CF cosine 0.3314 0.3314 0.5424 0.4427 0.6376 0.4735 P3α 0.3245 0.3245 0.5503 0.4437 0.6404 0.4730 RP3β 0.3202 0.3202 0.5525 0.4424 0.6470 0.4732 EASER 0.3272 0.3272 0.5452 0.4417 0.6435 0.4736 SLIM 0.3233 0.3233 0.5438 0.4389 0.6476 0.4726 PureSVD 0.2462 0.2462 0.4889 0.3714 0.6260 0.4156 ItemKNN CBF asymmetric 0.0589 0.0589 0.0958 0.0769 0.1467 0.0931 UserKNN CBF asymmetric 0.2464 0.2464 0.4654 0.3600 0.5798 0.3970 ItemKNN CFCBF asymmetric 0.3331 0.3331 0.5434 0.4442 0.6314 0.4727 UserKNN CFCBF asymmetric 0.3424 0.3424 0.5882 0.4713 0.6937 0.5055 DeepCF 0.2647 0.2647 0.5244 0.3995 0.6583 0.4428 CoupledCF 0.2641 0.2641 0.5175 0.3948 0.6499 0.4377 We highlight in bold those entries where a baseline outperforms CoupledCF. work.Aspecificprobleminthisworkalsoliesinthecreationofthetrainandtestsplits,whichare inconsistent with the description reported in the article and are likely the result of an erroneous splitting procedure. Further methodological problems were discussed in a recent article by Ferrari Dacrema et al. [24], which questioned the claim that embedding maps derived from the outer product of the embeddings are analogous to images. The article shows that embedding maps do not have a se- mantically relevant topology and do not share image properties, therefore the use of CNNs is not welljustified.Moreover,contrarytowhatstatedintheoriginalpaper,CoupledCFdoesnotbenefit ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 37 =====
20:36 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. Table 16. Experimental Results for DELF on the MovieLens Dataset HR@5 NDCG@5 HR@10 NDCG@10 HR@20 NDCG@20 TopPopular 0.3302 0.2229 0.4696 0.2674 0.6577 0.3148 UserKNN CF asymmetric0.5205 0.3635 0.6852 0.4168 0.8329 0.4542 ItemKNN CF cosine 0.4936 0.3426 0.6677 0.3989 0.8243 0.4387 P3α 0.4945 0.3438 0.6574 0.3965 0.7952 0.4313 RP3β 0.5138 0.3559 0.6809 0.4102 0.8276 0.4475 EASER 0.5716 0.4064 0.7258 0.4566 0.8516 0.4887 SLIM 0.5706 0.4038 0.7306 0.4557 0.8586 0.4882 PureSVD 0.5513 0.3891 0.7021 0.4382 0.8303 0.4708 iALS 0.5643 0.3975 0.7228 0.4489 0.8354 0.4776 DELF MLP 0.5168 0.3587 0.6809 0.4119 0.8342 0.4508 DELF EF 0.4805 0.3305 0.6504 0.3852 0.8043 0.4243 We highlight in bold those entries where a baseline outperforms DELF. fromtheadditionalparameterspaceprovidedbytheembeddingcorrelationsthatcanberemoved from the model without altering its accuracy. A.8 DELF: A Dual-embedding-based Deep Latent Factor Model for Recommendation Datasets. Two public rating datasets are used for the evaluation. One is the well-knownMovie- Lens1M71 datasetandtheotheronethe AmazonMusic72 dataset.Theratingdatasetswerebinarized by transforming each non-zero rating to 1. Pre-processing was applied so that for both datasets only users were retained for which more than 20 interactions were observed. Through this pre- processing, the Amazon Music dataset was reduced to less than one tenth of its original size in terms of interactions (only 76k interactions for 40k items remain in the Amazon Music dataset). The Amazon Music dataset contains, on average, only 2 interactions per item. Due to this, when the train-test split is performed according to the timestamp, 52% of the items in the test data are cold (i.e., they never appear in the train data for any user). An evaluation so strongly oriented to- wardscolditemsisparticularlysurprising,consideringthatDELFisapurecollaborativealgorithm that, as such, cannot be able to learn a representation for any of those cold items. Evaluation. The evaluation procedure was similar to the one used for NCF as discussed in Sec- tion A.3: a leave-last-out procedure was applied using the interaction timestamp, the hidden ele- ment was ranked within 99 randomly sampled negative items, and the Hit Rate and the NDCG at a cut-off length of 10 were used as performance measures. The non-trival baselines include BPR matrix-factorization, iALS, DMF as discussed in SectionA.4, and two variants of the NCF model [30] described in SectionA.3. Thehyperparametersfortheproposedmodelweresystematicallyoptimizedonavalidationset built with the second most recent interaction. No information is provided regarding the hyperpa- rameter optimization of the baselines. Results and Discussion. We reproduced the results using a validation set that we constructed in the same way as reported by the authors. NDCG@10 was used as an optimization criterion. The obtained results are shown in Table16 (MovieLens1M) and Table17 (Amazon Music). For theMovieLens1Mdataset,allourmachinelearningbaselinesoutperformed DELFonallmeasures. 71https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/. 72http://jmcauley.ucsd.edu/data/amazon/. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 38 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:37 Table 17. Experimental Results for DELF for the Amazon Music Data When the Recommendation of Cold Items Is Allowed HR@5 NDCG@5 HR@10 NDCG@10 HR@20 NDCG@20 TopPopular 0.2452 0.1726 0.3057 0.1921 0.3744 0.2094 UserKNN CF cosine 0.3248 0.2544 0.3760 0.2708 0.4376 0.2864 ItemKNN CF asymmetric 0.3204 0.2566 0.3711 0.2731 0.4327 0.2886 P3α 0.3188 0.2524 0.3684 0.2684 0.4300 0.2839 RP3β 0.3155 0.2494 0.3684 0.2663 0.4272 0.2811 EASER - ----- SLIM 0.3199 0.2577 0.3678 0.2730 0.4354 0.2900 PureSVD 0.2627 0.2141 0.3084 0.2290 0.3537 0.2405 iALS 0.3319 0.2604 0.3717 0.2732 0.4229 0.2860 DELF MLP 0.2986 0.2339 0.3619 0.2542 0.4561 0.2778 DELF EF 0.5422 0.3632 0.7439 0.4290 0.8578 0.4583 EASER resultsaremissing,becausethecoderequiredtoomuchmemoryonthesedatasets.Wehighlightinbold those entries where a baseline outperforms DELF. Table 18. Experimental Results for DELF for the Amazon Music Data When the Recommendation of Cold Items IsNotAllowed HR@5 NDCG@5 HR@10 NDCG@10 HR@20 NDCG@20 TopPopular 0.2474 0.1730 0.3041 0.1913 0.3738 0.2090 UserKNN CF cosine 0.3150 0.2495 0.3471 0.2600 0.3738 0.2668 ItemKNN CF asymmetric0.3090 0.2506 0.3401 0.2609 0.3717 0.2689 P3α 0.3074 0.2465 0.3373 0.2564 0.3689 0.2644 RP3β 0.3046 0.2434 0.3379 0.2543 0.3651 0.2611 EASER - ----- SLIM 0.3101 0.2526 0.3411 0.2625 0.3711 0.2701 PureSVD 0.2627 0.2141 0.3084 0.2290 0.3542 0.2406 iALS 0.3319 0.2604 0.3706 0.2729 0.4109 0.2831 DELF MLP 0.2905 0.2239 0.3275 0.2361 0.3787 0.2489 DELF EF 0.2883 0.2224 0.3313 0.2364 0.3831 0.2496 EASER results are missing, because the code required too much memory on this dataset. We highlight in bold those entries where a baseline outperforms DELF. ThetraditionalUserKNNmethodisalsocompetitivewithDELFonthisdataset.OnAmazonMusic, however,DELFEFleadstosubstantiallybetteraccuracyresultsthanallbaselines.Aswepreviously observed, the test data of Amazon Music contains an anomalously high number of cold items, for which pure collaborative filtering approaches cannot learn a representation. ToassessiftheperformanceofDELFEFisduetothisuncommontestdataset,weranadditional experiments in which we removed the cold items from the test sets. This allows us to assess the true modeling capacity of the approach. The results are shown are shown in Table18 (Amazon Music) and Table16 (MovieLens1M). Compared to the situation where cold items are considered inthetestset,therecommendationqualityofDELFEFdropsbelowmanyofourbaselinesforthe AmazonMusicdataset.FortheMovieLensdataset,wheretherearenocolditems,theperformance does not change much as expected. Overall, these observations lead to the conclusion that DELF EFhasatendencytopushneverseenitemstohigherranksoftherecommendationlist,i.e.,higher ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 39 =====
20:38 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. thanthepreviouslyseennegativesamples.ThismightbeaconsequenceoftheDELFEFheuristic, which takes the the popularity of the items into account. Overall, when considering only situations where cold items are not recommended, DELF was neverthebest-performingone.FortheMovieLens1Mdata,iALS,EASE R,andSLIMoutperformed DELF on all measures. The UserKNN method was also consistently better in terms of the NDCG (the optimization criterion). OntheAmazondataset,iALSwasbetterthanallothermethods.Furthermore,allneighborhood models and SLIM outperformed the new methods in all but one measurement (NDCG@20). A consistent “win” for DELF method was only observed over the PureSVD method. Looking at methodological aspects, like in other works discussed here, the authors did not op- timizethenumberofepochsonthevalidationsetbuttookthebestvaluesusingthetest.Thisisa methodological issue leading to information leakage from the test data. A.9 Outer Product-based Neural Collaborative Filtering (ConvNCF) Datasets. The proposed method is evaluated on two public implicit-feedback datasets,Gowalla73 and Yelp74. Both datasets contain multiple implicit interactions at different timestamps for the sameuser-itempair.Theseinteractionsaremergedbykeepingonlytheearliestforeachuser-item pair.75 Both dataset have been filtered by removing items with less than 10 interactions and users with less than 2 (Gowalla) or 10 (Yelp) interactions. The Yelp dataset has about 69k interactions after processing. The Gowalla dataset is sparser and with more interactions (1.2M). Both filtered datasets with their train/test splits have been provided by the authors. Evaluation.Eachdatasetissplitintotrainingandtestdataaccordingtoaleave-last-outprotocol. Evaluation is done by randomly selecting 999 negative items, and the algorithm has to rank these itemstogetherwiththehiddenitem.Differentmethodologicalissueswereobserved,aswillbedis- cussedbelow.TheHitRateandtheNDCGatdifferentlistlengthsareusedasevaluationmeasures. Hyperparameteroptimizationisdoneviaavalidationset,exceptfortheembeddingsize,whichis kept constant for all methods. Results and Discussion. We could reproduce the results using the code and the data provided by the authors. The results for the Yelp dataset are shown in Table19. Those for the larger Gowalla dataset are given in Table20. FortheYelpdataset,ConvNCFisconsistentlyoutperformedbythetraditionalnearest-neighbor methods, RP3β, and SLIM. The other baselines outperform ConvNCF as well in most cases. For the Gowalla case, ConvNCF is slightly more competitive. In all but one measurement, however, it is outperformed by the UserKNN method. Interestingly, the simple machine learning methods do not work better on this dataset than the simple baselines. A number of methodological issues were observed with this article. First, based on the pro- vided source code the number of epochs, as in other papers, was determined on the test data. Furthermore, the authors decided to set the embedding size to the constant value of 64 for all baselines. However, the embedding size is a hyperparameter to be tuned for each dataset and for each embedding-based algorithm, as different models with different objective functions or train- ing procedures will likely require different values for it. There were also issues with the provided test splits. Negative test samples contained duplicates and partially overlapped with the train data. This results in virtually no user having the correct number of 999 unique negative items. 735http://dawenl.github.io/data/gowalla_pro.zip. 74https://github.com/hexiangnan/sigir16-eals. 75For the Gowalla dataset the authors use the first interaction appearing in the file as theearlier interaction. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 40 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:39 Table 19. Experimental Results for ConvNCF for the Yelp Dataset HR@5 NDCG@5 HR@10 NDCG@10 HR@20 NDCG@20 TopPopular 0.0817 0.0538 0.1200 0.0661 0.1751 0.0799 UserKNN CF asymmetric0.2131 0.1400 0.3209 0.1747 0.4482 0.2068 ItemKNN CF cosine 0.2521 0.1686 0.3669 0.2056 0.4974 0.2385 P3α 0.2146 0.1395 0.3211 0.1737 0.4442 0.2049 RP3β 0.2202 0.1431 0.3323 0.1793 0.4667 0.2132 EASER 0.2349 0.1557 0.3419 0.1902 0.4617 0.2205 SLIM 0.2330 0.1535 0.3475 0.1904 0.4799 0.2238 PureSVD 0.2011 0.1307 0.3002 0.1626 0.4238 0.1938 iALS 0.2048 0.1348 0.3080 0.1680 0.4319 0.1993 ConvNCF 0.1947 0.1250 0.3059 0.1608 0.4446 0.1957 We highlight in bold those entries where a baseline outperforms ConvCF. Table 20. Experimental Results for ConvNCF for the Gowalla Dataset HR@5 NDCG@5 HR@10 NDCG@10 HR@20 NDCG@20 TopPopular 0.2188 0.1652 0.2910 0.1884 0.3803 0.2110 UserKNN CF cosine 0.7131 0.5879 0.7939 0.6142 0.8532 0.6293 ItemKNN CF tversky 0.7047 0.5864 0.7790 0.6105 0.8331 0.6244 P3α 0.6926 0.5703 0.7674 0.5948 0.8158 0.6071 RP3β 0.6836 0.5525 0.7723 0.5814 0.8361 0.5976 EASER - ----- SLIM 0.6365 0.5284 0.7083 0.5517 0.7608 0.5651 PureSVD 0.5653 0.4482 0.6627 0.4798 0.7393 0.4993 iALS 0.6460 0.5081 0.7554 0.5436 0.8356 0.5641 ConvNCF 0.6702 0.5233 0.7799 0.5590 0.8623 0.5799 EASER results are missing, because the code required too much memory on this dataset. We highlight in bold those entries where a baseline outperforms ConvCF. Furthermore, the users having less than 980, are only 1% for Gowalla but a remarkable 60% for Yelp, with a minimum of 938 negative items.76 In addition, a recent article by Ferrari Dacrema et al. [24] questioned the claim that embed- dingmapsderivedfromtheouterproductoftheembeddingsareanalogoustoimages.Thearticle showsthatembeddingmapsdonothaveasemanticallyrelevanttopologyanddonotshareimage properties,thereforetheuseofCNNsisnotwelljustified.Moreover,contrarytowhatstatedinthe originalpaper,ConvNCFdoesnotallowtomodeltheembeddingcorrelationsthatcanberemoved from the model without altering its accuracy. 76We report that at the time of our experiments the published version of the algorithm contained a bug that caused infor- mation leakage from the test data. Items not present in the train data were divided in two categories, thosenot present in the test data were sampled as negative items during the training of the model, while those present in the test data were not. Items unobserved in the train data should all be potential negative items to be sampled during training, regardless of the test data, otherwise test items will be advantaged over other items. This bug was later fixed on the public Github repository. In our experiments, during the training we only relied upon train data and never used any information from the test data. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 41 =====
20:40 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. A.10 Leveraging Meta-path-based Context (MCRec) Datasets.Threedatasetsareusedfortheevaluation.Thehistorical MovieLens100k77 dataset,an- other small data set containing listening logs fromLast.fm,78 and a dataset containing user feed- backfrom Yelp.79 Withalmost200kratings,theYelpdatasetisthelargestone.Theavailablemeta- data includes genres for movies, artists for tracks, and city and category for businesses. Only for the MovieLens100k dataset the used data splits are publicly available. The rating information in the datasets is transformed to binary data. Evaluation.Thedatasetsaresplitinto80%trainingand20%testsplits.Tenpercentofthetraining data are used for validation. The algorithm is evaluated by ranking the positive items of a user against a set of negative items randomly sampled among the items the user did not interact with. For each user, a set of exactly 50 negative items is sampled for each of the user’s test items. The negativeinteractionsintrainandtestdataaredisjoint. 80 FortheMovieLens100kdataset,23%ofthe users have long user profiles to the point that they cannot have the stated number of 50 negative items per each positive, because the number of items that do not appear in the user profile is too low.81 Precision, Recall, and the NDCG are then used as evaluation measures at a cut-off length of 10. The averaged results of ten randomized runs are reported in the paper. Since the NDCG measure was implemented in an unusual way by computing the “ideal” NDCG only based on the successfully recommended items, the values reported in the paper are much higher than the ones obtained by us using a standard implementation of the NDCG. Looking at the evaluation code provided by the authors, we furthermore observed that the authors reported the best results for eachmetricacrossdifferentepochs.Sincethisisinappropriate,wereportthevaluesofthemetrics after the optimal number of epochs is chosen with early stopping on the validation set. As baselines, the authors use ItemKNN, two collaborative MF methods (one based on BPR loss, the other based on cross entropy loss), two hybrid MF methods, two methods designed for meta- data networks, and a number of variants of their own method. For their own method, the final hyperparameters are reported, which are the same for both datasets. For the MF and the NeuMF method, hyperparameters and configuration are taken from the original papers. Other baselines are reported to be systematically optimized on a validation set. Results and Discussion. The meta-path information is hard-coded for the MovieLens dataset in the provided code and the preprocessed version of the data is publicly available. No code is avail- ablefortheothertwodatasets.Furthermore,sincethecodeforpre-processingtheYelpandLast.fm is not available, we only did an evaluation for the MovieLens dataset.82 The results are reported in Table21. They show that MCRec is outperformed both by the traditional neighborhood-based methods, the more complex learning-based methods and one of our simple hybrids. Our pure content-based baseline led to generally weak results (worse than TopPopular) and was also out- performed by MCRec. 77http://jmcauley.ucsd.edu/data/amazon/. 78https://www.last.fm. 79http://www.yelp.com/dataset-challenge. 80This evaluation protocol is different from more traditional protocols. Usually, both the number of positive items and negative items associated to each user is constant (e.g., 1 positive item ranked with 100 negative items), in MCRec instead differentusersaretestedagainstadifferentnumberofbothpositiveandnegativesamples(e.g.,ifthepositiveitemsare10 the negative samples will be 500, if the positive items are 30 the negative samples will be 1,500). 81In particular, the longest user profile (including all available data, therefore train, validation and test interactions) that allows to sample 50 negative items for each positive (test) item is 151. However, the longest user profile in the dataset contains 737 items, which would require to sample 7,370 negative items while the dataset contains 1662 and the number of unseen items to choose from is only 925. 82The pre-processing code for Movielens was made available later by the authors on their GitHub repository. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 42 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:41 Table 21. Experimental Results for MCRec for the MovieLens Dataset PREC@10 REC@10 NDCG@10 TopPopular 0.1907 0.1180 0.1361 UserKNN CF dice 0.3442 0.2237 0.2692 ItemKNN CF asymmetric 0.3320 0.2171 0.2601 P3α 0.3305 0.2081 0.2554 RP3β 0.3435 0.2191 0.2588 EASER 0.3739 0.2430 0.2905 SLIM 0.3770 0.2441 0.2957 PureSVD 0.3545 0.2247 0.2719 iALS 0.3596 0.2283 0.2759 ItemKNN CBF cosine 0.0455 0.0185 0.0254 ItemKNN CFCBF cosine 0.3398 0.2239 0.2646 MCRec 0.3110 0.2113 0.2466 We highlight in bold those entries where a baseline outperforms MCRec. Fromamethodologicalperspective,itisworthmentioningthattheuseddatasetsareverysmall, atleastcomparedtotheusualMovieLensandNetflixdatasets,wherewehavemillionsofrecorded interactions. We will discuss aspects of scalability in Section5. A.11 Collaborative Memory Network for Recommendation System (CMN) Datasets. The method was evaluated on three public datasets. One containing data fromEpin- ions,83 a CiteULike dataset used in previous works (CiteULike-a),84 and a dataset fromPinterest.85 The last dataset is the largest one and has about 1.5M interactions. The smallest Epinions dataset containsratingsonscalefromonetofive,whicharebinarized(allnon-zeroratingsaresettoone). The train/test splits for CiteULike and Pinterest are provided by the authors. Evaluation. The authors use a leave-one-out methodology similar to the one used in previous works.Thetestsetcontainsonepositiveitemperuser,thetrainsetallotheruser-itempairs.Ifthe userratedonlyoneitem,thenthisinteractioniskeptinthetrainingset.Toevaluatethealgorithm, for each user 100 unobserved (negative) items are sampled and ranked together with the positive item. The Hit Rate and the NDCG at a cut-off length of 10 are used as evaluation metrics. As baselines, the authors include both simple, non-neural, and neural methods in there experi- ments: ItemKNN, BPR matrix-factorization, SVD++, two variants of NCF [30], and the Collabora- tive Denoising Auto Encoder. Hyperparameters are tuned on a validation set. Details for the hyperparameter optimization process are provided for the proposed model, but not for the baselines. The number of training epochs is not mentioned in the paper. In our evaluation, we applied early stopping as described previously. ResultsandDiscussion .Wecouldreproducetheresultsofthepaperusingthedatasplitsprovided bytheauthorsfortwodatasets,CiteULikeandPinterest.SincethesplitusedforEpinionswasnot made available, we had to re-create it based on the information provided in the paper, in that case, however, we could not reproduce the original results. In Table22,w es h o wt h er e s u l t sf o r 83http://www.trustlet.org/downloaded_epinions.html. 84See SectionA.1. 85https://sites.google.com/site/xueatalphabeta/academic-projects. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 43 =====
20:42 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. Table 22. Experimental Results for CMN for the Pinterest Dataset HR@5 NDCG@5 HR@10 NDCG@10 TopPopular 0.1665 0.1064 0.2740 0.1409 UserKNN CF asymmetric 0.7005 0.5037 0.8630 0.5567 ItemKNN CF cosine 0.7132 0.5116 0.8781 0.5653 P3α 0.6990 0.5034 0.8596 0.5559 RP3β 0.7147 0.5150 0.8772 0.5680 EASER 0.7072 0.5129 0.8567 0.5617 SLIM 0.7084 0.5107 0.8683 0.5628 PureSVD 0.6619 0.4721 0.8146 0.5219 iALS 0.7219 0.5175 0.8677 0.5652 CMN 0.7013 0.5005 0.8674 0.5547 We highlight in bold those entries where a baseline outperforms CMN. the Pinterest dataset, the largest one. For the CMN method, we report the results for theCMN-3 variant, which led to the best results. The results show that CMN led to competitive results, but is actually slightly outperformed on all measures by algorithms from all families, including traditional nearest-neighbor methods. On the CiteULike dataset, the main observations are the same. On this smaller dataset, however, the performanceofCMNisoftenmuchlowerthantheoneachievedbynearest-neighbormethodsand machine learning techniques. AquitesurprisingresultisfoundfortheEpinionsdataset.Here,thetrivialTopPopularmethod consistently led to the best values across all measurements. The difference to all other methods is often huge. This indicates that the popularity distribution of the items in this dataset is very skewed, which makes it difficult to make personalized recommendations that are better in terms of information retrieval measures than the TopPopular method. The detailed results are available in the online material (Section3). A.12 Spectral Collaborative Filtering (SpectralCF) Datasets.Threepublicdatasetsareusedfortheevaluation, MovieLens1M,86 anothermovierating dataset (HetRec),87 and anAmazondataset (InstantVideo).88 Explicit ratings are binarized. Further pre-processing is applied to, e.g., remove users associated to less than 5 interactions. After pre- processing,theMovieLens1Mdatasetisshrinkedtoonefifthoftheoriginalsize(226kinteractions). The other datasets are even smaller (71k and 22k interactions, respectively). The data split for the MovieLens1M dataset is provided online by the authors. Due to an apparent problem on how the splits were generated—see our discussions below—we created our own splits based on the information provided in the paper. Evaluation.Twoevaluationscenariosaretested,aregularoneandacold-startsetup.Weevalu- ated both scenarios. For the main scenario, 80% of the interactions of each user are randomly put intothetrainingsetandtherestisusedforevaluation.Therandomprocessisrepeatedfivetimes and averaged results are reported. Recall and MAP at different list lengths are used as metrics for this scenario. 86https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/. 87https://grouplens.org/datasets/hetrec-2011/. 88http://jmcauley.ucsd.edu/data/amazon/. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 44 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:43 Table 23. Experimental Results for SpectralCF for the MovieLens Dataset REC@20 MAP@20 REC@40 MAP@40 REC@60 MAP@60 REC@80 MAP@80 REC@100 MAP@100 TopPopular 0.1892 0.0584 0.2788 0.0636 0.3356 0.0666 0.3834 0.0687 0.4226 0.0702 UserKNN CF jaccard 0.3001 0.1201 0.4134 0.1285 0.4901 0.1335 0.5457 0.1367 0.5884 0.1388 ItemKNN CF asymmetric 0.2876 0.1134 0.4000 0.1213 0.4768 0.1263 0.5367 0.1295 0.5820 0.1317 P3alpha 0.2939 0.1141 0.4150 0.1233 0.4900 0.1285 0.5463 0.1318 0.5903 0.1342 RP3beta 0.2737 0.1044 0.3879 0.1124 0.4664 0.1173 0.5234 0.1206 0.5726 0.1230 EASER 0.3085 0.1249 0.4255 0.1340 0.4986 0.1391 0.5559 0.1425 0.6010 0.1448 SLIM 0.3069 0.1265 0.4246 0.1356 0.5010 0.1410 0.5564 0.1443 0.6001 0.1466 PureSVD 0.2595 0.1008 0.3638 0.1083 0.4378 0.1131 0.4913 0.1161 0.5347 0.1182 iALS 0.3033 0.1183 0.4201 0.1273 0.4933 0.1326 0.5493 0.1360 0.5925 0.1383 SpectralCF 0.1813 0.0533 0.2643 0.0581 0.3274 0.0613 0.3823 0.0635 0.4261 0.0651 We highlight in bold those entries where a baseline outperforms SpectralCF. In the cold-start scenario, the training set is built with different degrees of sparsity by varying the numberP of interactions associated with each user, whereP is varied from one to five. The remainingitemsassociatedwitheachusersareusedastestset.Recall@20andMAP@20areused in this scenario for evaluation. As baselines,theauthorsconsider ItemKNN,BPR matrix factorization,iALS, NCF [30]and two graph-based methods, GNMF and GCMC, originally designed for explicit feedback datasets. The hyperparametersaretunedonavalidationsetandtheparameterrangesarereportedinthepaper. For NCF the authors stated that they used the configuration reported in the original paper. ResultsandDiscussion .Wereproducedtheresultsobtainedbytheauthorsbasedontheprovided code and following the information in the paper. Our first set of experiments showed that on HetRec and Amazon Video datasets the performance of SpectralCF was relatively weak, whereas it performed very well and better than all baselines when using the provided data splits for the MovieLens dataset. We therefore investigated the provided data splits and found that these splits wereunlikelytheresultofthesplittingproceduredescribedinthepaper,seethediscussionsbelow. For this reason, we created new data splits ourselves following the described procedure. TheresultsobtainedfortheMovieLens1MdatasetareshowninTable 23.Theresultsshowthat SpectralCFisoutperformedbyallbaselinesinourcomparisonoftenexhibitingarecommendation quality equal to the TopPopular method. The observations for the other datasets are similar, the full results are available in the online material (Section3). Toillustratethedatasplittingproblem,wecomparedthepopularitydistributionoftheitemsin thetrainingandthetestsplitintheprovideddata,seeFigure 3(a).Thefigureplotsthenormalized popularity (i.e., the popularity of an item over the popularity of the most popular item) for both training and test items. Items are ranked based on their popularity in the training set, with the mostpopulartrainingitemsbeingontheleft.Incaseofatruerandomsplit,thenormalizedpopu- larity values of the items in the training and the test split should be relatively close. However, the figure shows the split provided by the authors has some major deviations. Figure3(b) shows the popularitydistributionsofourrandomsplit,whicharealmostidenticalbetweentrainingandtest sets. Besidesthevisualanalysis,wealsocomputednumericalstatisticsliketheGiniindexandShan- non entropy. In a true random split, the Gini index should be close to the value obtained on the unsplitted data (in this case 0.78) for both the training and test splits. However, the Gini index ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 45 =====
20:44 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. Fig.3. NormalizedpopularitydistributionsofthetrainandtestsplitsforSpectralCF,thevalue1corresponds to the most popular item in that split. For a random split, as can be seen in panel (b), the normalized values of both splits are, on average, similar. In the split provided by the original authors, however, as can be seen in panel (a), train and test data have quite different distributions. of the provided test split is much higher (0.92). This indicates that the provided test split has a much higher popularity bias than we would expect. A similar consideration applies for the Shan- non entropy: the entropy of the original dataset is close to 10 and is similar to the entropy of our randomtrain/testsplit.However,theprovidedtestsplithasalowerentropy(8.5),i.e.,itiseasierto predict. Regardingothermethodologicalaspects,wefoundthattheauthorsonlyreportonesetofhyper- parameters,whereasonewouldexpecthyperparametersettingsforeachdataset.Inourevaluation, we therefore optimized the hyperparameters for all baselines and all datasets individually. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 46 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:45 B HYPERPARAMETER RANGES Table 24. Hyperparameter List, Value Ranges, and Distributions for the Baselines Reported in This Paper Algorithm Hyperparameter Range Type Distribution UserKNN, ItemKNN cosine topK 5–1,000 Integer uniform shrink 0–1,000 Integer uniform normalizea True, False Categorical feature weighting none, TF-IDF, BM25 Categorical UserKNN, ItemKNN dice topK 5–1,000 Integer uniform shrink 0–1,000 Integer uniform normalizea True, False Categorical UserKNN, ItemKNN jaccard topK 5–1,000 Integer uniform shrink 0–1,000 Integer uniform normalizea True, False Categorical UserKNN, ItemKNN asymmetric topK 5–1,000 Integer uniform shrink 0–1,000 Integer uniform normalizea True Categorical asymmetric alpha 0–2 Real uniform feature weighting none, TF-IDF, BM25 Categorical UserKNN, ItemKNN tversky topK 5–1,000 Integer uniform shrink 0–1,000 Integer uniform normalizea True Categorical tversky alpha 0–2 Real uniform tversky beta 0–2 Real uniform P3alpha topK 5–1,000 Integer uniform alpha 0–2 Real uniform normalize similarityb True, False Categorical RP3beta topK 5–1,000 Integer uniform alpha 0–2 Real uniform beta 0–2 Real uniform normalize similarityb True, False Categorical SLIMElasticNet topK 5–1,000 Integer uniform l1 ratio 10−5–1 00 Real log-uniform alpha 10−3–1 00 Real uniform PureSVD num factors 1–350 Integer uniform iALS num factors 1–200c Integer uniform epochs 1–500 Integer early-stopping confidence scaling linear, log Categorical alpha 10−3–5 ·10+1d Real log-uniform epsilon 10−3–1 0+1d Real log-uniform reg 10−5–1 0−2 Real log-uniform EASER l2 norm 100–1 0+7 Real log-uniform aThenormalizehyperparameter in KNNs refers to the use of the denominator when computing the similarity. bThe normalize similarityhyperparameter refers to applying L1 regularisation on the rows of the similarity matrix. cThe number of factors is lower than PureSVD due to iALS being slower. dThe maximum value of this hyperparameter had been suggested in the article proposing the algorithm. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 47 =====
20:46 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. REFERENCES [1] FabioAiolli.2013.Efficienttop-nrecommendationforverylargescalebinaryrateddatasets.In Proceedingsofthe7th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys’13). 273–280. [2] Sebastiano Antenucci, Simone Boglio, Emanuele Chioso, Ervin Dervishaj, Shuwen Kang, Tommaso Scarlatti, and MaurizioFerrariDacrema.2018.Artist-drivenlayeringanduser’sbehaviourimpactonrecommendationsinaplaylist continuation scenario. InProceedings of the ACM Recommender Systems Challenge 2018. ACM, 4:1–4:6.DOI:https:// doi.org/10.1145/3267471.3267475 [3] TimothyG.Armstrong,AlistairMoffat,WilliamWebber,andJustinZobel.2009.Improvementsthatdon’taddup:Ad- hocretrievalresultssince1998.In Proceedingsofthe18thACMConferenceonInformationandKnowledgeManagement (CIKM’09). 601–610. [4] Jöran Beel and Stefan Langer. 2015. A comparison of offline evaluations, online evaluations, and user studies in the context of research-paper recommender systems. InProceedings of the 19th International Conference on Theory and Practice of Digital Libraries (TPDL’15). 153–168. [5] Robert M. Bell and Yehuda Koren. 2007. Improved neighborhood-based collaborative filtering. InProceedings of the KDD Cup and Workshop at the 13th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD’07). 7–14. [6] James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. 2012. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization.J .M a c h .L e a r n .R e s .13 (Feb.2012), 281–305. [7] Shlomo Berkovsky, Ivan Cantador, and Domonkos Tikk (Eds.). 2019.Collaborative Recommendations—Algorithms, Practical Challenges and Applications. World Scientific. [8] HomangaBharadhwaj,HominPark,andBrianY.Lim.2018.RecGAN:Recurrentgenerativeadversarialnetworksfor recommendation systems. InProceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys’18). 372–376. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3240323.3240383 [9] Daniel Billsus and Michael J. Pazzani. 1998. Learning collaborative information filters. InProceedings of the 15th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML’98). 46–54. [10] JohnS.Breese,DavidHeckerman,andCarlKadie.1998.Empiricalanalysisofpredictivealgorithmsforcollaborative filtering. InProceedings of the 14th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI’98). 43–52. [11] RocíoCañamares,PabloCastells,andAlistairMoffat.2020.Offlineevaluationoptionsforrecommendersystems. Info. Retriev. J.23, 4 (2020), 387–410. [12] Jingyuan Chen, Hanwang Zhang, Xiangnan He, Liqiang Nie, Wei Liu, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2017. Attentive collab- orative filtering: Multimedia recommendation with item-and component-level attention. InProceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR’17). 335–344. [13] Weiyu Cheng, Yanyan Shen, Yanmin Zhu, and Linpeng Huang. 2018. DELF: A dual-embedding based deep latent factor model for recommendation. InProceedings of the 27th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI’18). 3329–3335. [14] AndyCockburn,PierreDragicevic,LonniBesançon,andCarlGutwin.2020.Threatsofareplicationcrisisinempirical computer science.Commun. ACM63, 8 (2020), 70–79. [15] Christian Collberg and Todd A. Proebsting. 2016. Repeatability in computer systems research.Commun. ACM59, 3 (2016), 62–69. [16] Colin Cooper, Sang Hyuk Lee, Tomasz Radzik, and Yiannis Siantos. 2014. Random walks in recommender systems: Exactcomputationandsimulations.In Proceedingsofthe23rdInternationalConferenceonWorldWideWeb(WWW’14) . 811–816. [17] PaoloCremonesi,FrancaGarzotto,andRobertoTurrin.2012.Investigatingthepersuasionpotentialofrecommender systems from a quality perspective: An empirical study.Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst.2, 2 (2012), 1–41. [18] Paolo Cremonesi, Yehuda Koren, and Roberto Turrin. 2010. Performance of recommender algorithms on top-n rec- ommendation tasks. InProceedings of the 4th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys’10). 39–46. [19] Maurizio Ferrari Dacrema, Paolo Cremonesi, and Dietmar Jannach. 2020. Methodological issues in recommender systemsresearch(extendedabstract).In Proceedingsofthe29thInternationalJointConferenceonArtificialIntelligence, IJCAI 2020. ijcai.org, 4706–4710.DOI:https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2020/650 [20] Lee R. Dice. 1945. Measures of the amount of ecologic association between species.Ecology 26, 3 (1945), 297–302. DOI:https://doi.org/10.2307/1932409arXiv:https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.2307/1932409 [21] Travis Ebesu, Bin Shen, and Yi Fang. 2018.Collaborative memory network for recommendation systems. InProceed- ings of the 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR’18). 515–524. [22] Ali Mamdouh Elkahky, Yang Song, and Xiaodong He. 2015. A multi-view deep learning approach for cross domain user modeling in recommendation systems. InProceedings of the 24th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW’15). 278–288. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 48 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:47 [23] Maurizio Ferrari Dacrema, Paolo Cremonesi, and Dietmar Jannach. 2019. Are we really making much progress? A worrying analysis of recent neural recommendation approaches. InProceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on RecommenderSystems(RecSys’19).101–109. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3298689.3347058Source:https://github.com/ MaurizioFD/RecSys2019_DeepLearning_Evaluation. [24] Maurizio Ferrari Dacrema, Federico Parroni, Paolo Cremonesi, and Dietmar Jannach. 2020. Critically examining the claimed value of convolutions over user-item embedding maps for recommender systems. InProceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM’20). DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3340531.3411901 [25] Juliana Freire, Norbert Fuhr, and Andreas Rauber. 2016. Reproducibility of data-oriented experiments in e-science (dagstuhl seminar 16041).Dagstuhl Rep.6, 1 (2016), 108–159. [26] Antonino Freno, Martin Saveski, Rodolphe Jenatton, and Cédric Archambeau. 2015. One-pass ranking models for low-latencyproductrecommendations.In Proceedingsofthe21stACMSIGKDDInternationalConferenceonKnowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD’15). 1789–1798.DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2783258.2788579 [27] Florent Garcin, Boi Faltings, Olivier Donatsch, Ayar Alazzawi, Christophe Bruttin, and Amr Huber. 2014. Offline and online evaluation of news recommender systems at Swissinfo.Ch. InProceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys’14). 169–176. [28] Asela Gunawardana and Guy Shani. 2015. Evaluating recommender systems. InRecommender Systems Handbook. Springer, 265–308. [29] XiangnanHe,XiaoyuDu,XiangWang,FengTian,JinhuiTang,andTat-SengChua.2018.Outerproduct-basedneural collaborative filtering. InProceedings of the 27th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI’18). 2227–2233. [30] XiangnanHe,LiziLiao,HanwangZhang,LiqiangNie,XiaHu,andTat-SengChua.2017.Neuralcollaborativefiltering. InProceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW’17). 173–182. [31] José Miguel Hernández-Lobato, Matthew W. Hoffman, and Zoubin Ghahramani. 2014. Predictive entropy search for efficient global optimization of black-box functions. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27, Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. D. Lawrence, and K. Q. Weinberger (Eds.). Curran Associates, Inc., 918– 926. Retrieved from http://papers.nips.cc/paper/5324-predictive-entropy-search-for-efficient-global-optimization- of-black-box-functions.pdf . [32] Binbin Hu, Chuan Shi, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Philip S. Yu. 2018. Leveraging meta-path based context for top-n rec- ommendation with a neural co-attention model. InProceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD’18). 1531–1540. [33] YifanHu,YehudaKoren,andChrisVolinsky.2008.Collaborativefilteringforimplicitfeedbackdatasets.In Proceedings of the 8th IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM’08), Vol. 8. 263–272. [34] Donghyun Kim, Chanyoung Park, Jinoh Oh, Sungyoung Lee, and Hwanjo Yu. 2016. Convolutional matrix factor- ization for document context-aware recommendation. InProceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys’16). 233–240.DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2959100.2959165 [35] Doudou LaLoudouana and Mambobo Bonouliqui Tarare.2002. Data set selection. Retrieved fromhttp://www.jmlg. org/papers/laloudouana03.pdf. [36] Mark Levy and Kris Jack. 2013. Efficient top-n recommendation by linear regression. InProceedings of the RecSys Large Scale Recommender Systems Workshop. [37] XiaopengLiandJamesShe.2017.Collaborativevariationalautoencoderforrecommendersystems.In Proceedingsof the 23th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD’17). 305–314. [38] Dawen Liang, Rahul G. Krishnan, Matthew D. Hoffman, and Tony Jebara. 2018. Variational autoencoders for collab- orative filtering. InProceedings of the 27th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW’18). 689–698. [39] Jimmy Lin. 2019. The neural hype and comparisons against weak baselines.SIGIR Forum52, 2 (Jan. 2019), 40–51. [40] Jimmy Lin. 2019. The neural hype, justified! A recantation.SIGIR Forum53, 2 (2019), 88–93. [41] Greg Linden, Brent Smith, and Jeremy York. 2003. Amazon.com recommendations: Item-to-item collaborative filter- ing. IEEE Internet Comput.7, 1 (2003), 76–80. [42] ZacharyC.LiptonandJacobSteinhardt.2019.Troublingtrendsinmachinelearningscholarship. Queue17,1,Article Pages 80 (Feb. 2019), 33 pages.DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3317287.3328534 [43] Pasquale Lops, Marco De Gemmis, and Giovanni Semeraro. 2011. Content-based recommender systems: State of the art and trends. InRecommender Systems Handbook. Springer, 73–105. [44] Malte Ludewig and Dietmar Jannach. 2018. Evaluation of session-based recommendation algorithms.User-Model. User-Adapt. Interact.28, 4–5 (2018), 331–390. [45] Malte Ludewig, Noemi Mauro, Sara Latifi, and Dietmar Jannach. 2019. Performance comparison of neural and non- neural approaches to session-based recommendation. InProceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys’19). 462–466. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 49 =====
20:48 M. Ferrari Dacrema et al. [46] Spyros Makridakis, Evangelos Spiliotis, and Vassilios Assimakopoulos. 2018. Statistical and machine learning fore- casting methods: Concerns and ways forward.PloSOne 13, 3 (2018). [47] AndriiMaksai,FlorentGarcin,andBoiFaltings.2015.Predictingonlineperformanceofnewsrecommendersystems through richer evaluation metrics. InProceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys’15). 179–186. [48] Jarana Manotumruksa, Craig Macdonald, and Iadh Ounis. 2018. A contextual attention recurrent architecture for context-awarevenuerecommendation.In Proceedingsofthe41stInternationalACMSIGIRConferenceonResearchand Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR’18). 555–564.DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210042 [49] Sean M. McNee, John Riedl, and Joseph A. Konstan. 2006. Being accurate is not enough: How accuracy metrics have hurt recommender systems. InProceedings of the CHI Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA’06). 1097–1101.DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1125451.1125659 [50] Bamshad Mobasher, Xin Jin, and Yanzan Zhou. 2004. Semantically enhanced collaborative filtering on the web. In Web Mining: From Web to Semantic Web, Bettina Berendt, Andreas Hotho, Dunja Mladenič, Maarten van Someren, Myra Spiliopoulou, and Gerd Stumme (Eds.). Springer Berlin, 57–76. [51] ThaiBinh Nguyen and Atsuhiro Takasu. 2018. NPE: Neural personalized embedding for collaborative filtering. In Proceedings of the 27th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI’18). 1583–1589. Retrieved from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3304415.3304640. [52] Xia Ning and George Karypis. 2011. SLIM: Sparse linear methods for top-n recommender systems. InProceedings of the 11th IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM’11). 497–506. [53] Arkadiusz Paterek. 2007. Improving regularized singular value decomposition for collaborative filtering. InProceed- ings of the KDD Cup and Workshop. 39–42. [54] BibekPaudel,FabianChristoffel,ChrisNewell,andAbrahamBernstein.2017.Updatable,accurate,diverse,andscal- able recommendations for interactive applications.A C MT r a n s .I n t e r a c t .I n t e l l .S y s t .7, 1 (2017), 1. [55] Ali Mustafa Qamar, Éric Gaussier, Jean-Pierre Chevallet, and Joo-Hwee Lim. 2008. Similarity learning for nearest- neighbor classification. InProceedings of the 8th IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM’08). 983–988. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDM.2008.81 [56] Steffen Rendle, Walid Krichene, Li Zhang, and John Anderson. 2020. Neural collaborative filtering vs. matrix factor- ization revisited. InProceedings of the 14th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys’20). [57] SteffenRendle,LiZhang,andYehudaKoren.2019.Onthedifficultyofevaluatingbaselines:Astudyonrecommender systems. Retrieved fromhttp://arxiv.org/abs/1905.01395. [58] PaulResnick,NeophytosIacovou,MiteshSuchak,PeterBergstrom,andJohnRiedl.1994.GroupLens:Anopenarchi- tectureforcollaborativefilteringofnetnews.In ProceedingsoftheACMConferenceonComputer-SupportedCooperative Work (CSCW’94). 175–186. [59] Marco Rossetti, Fabio Stella, and Markus Zanker. 2016. Contrasting offline and online results when evaluating rec- ommendation algorithms. InProceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys’16). 31–34. [60] Noveen Sachdeva, Kartik Gupta, and Vikram Pudi. 2018. Attentive neural architecture incorporating song features formusicrecommendation.In Proceedingsofthe12thACMConferenceonRecommenderSystems(RecSys’18) .417–421. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3240323.3240397 [61] Badrul Sarwar, George Karypis, Joseph Konstan, and John Riedl. 2001. Item-based collaborative filtering recommen- dation algorithms. InProceedings of the 10th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW’01). 285–295. [62] Badrul Sarwar, George Karypis, Joseph Konstan, and John Riedl. 2002. Incremental singular value decomposition algorithms for highly scalable recommender systems. InProceedings of the 5th International Conference on Computer and Information Science (ICIS’02), Vol. 1. Citeseer, 27–8. [63] Harald Steck. 2019. Embarrassingly shallow autoencoders for sparse data. InProceedings of the 28th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW’19) (TheWebConf’19). 3251–3257. [64] Victoria Stodden. 2010. The scientific method in practice: Reproducibility in the computational sciences.MIT Sloan Research Paper, No. 4773-10(2010). [65] Zhu Sun, Jie Yang, Jie Zhang, Alessandro Bozzon, Long-Kai Huang, and Chi Xu. 2018. Recurrent knowledge graph embedding for effective recommendation. InProceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys’18). 297–305.DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3240323.3240361 [66] Yi Tay, Luu Anh Tuan, and Siu Cheung Hui. 2018. Latent relational metric learning via memory-based attention for collaborative ranking. InProceedings of the 27th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW’18). 729–739. [67] Yi Tay, Luu Anh Tuan, and Siu Cheung Hui. 2018. Multi-pointer co-attention networks for recommendation. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD’18). 2309–2318. [68] Trinh Xuan Tuan and Tu Minh Phuong. 2017. 3D convolutional networks for session-based recommendation with content features. InProceedings of the 11th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys’17). 138–146. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3109859.3109900 ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.

===== PAGE 50 =====
A Troubling Analysis of Reproducibility and Progress in Recommender Systems Research 20:49 [69] Amos Tversky. 1977. Features of similarity.Psychol. Rev.84, 4 (1977), 327–352. [70] Patrick Vandewalle, Jelena Kovacevic, and Martin Vetterli. 2009. Reproducible research in signal processing.IEEE Signal Process. Mag.26, 3 (2009), 37–47. [71] Flavian Vasile, Elena Smirnova, and Alexis Conneau. 2016. Meta-Prod2Vec: Product embeddings using side- information for recommendation. InProceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys’16). 225–232. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2959100.2959160 [72] Kiri Wagstaff. 2012. Machine learning that matters. InProceedings of the 29th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML’12). 529–536. [73] HaoWang,NaiyanWang,andDit-YanYeung.2015.Collaborativedeeplearningforrecommendersystems.In Proceed- ingsofthe21thACMSIGKDDInternationalConferenceonKnowledgeDiscoveryandDataMining(KDD’15) .1235–1244. [74] Jun Wang, Stephen Robertson, Arjen P. de Vries, and Marcel J. T. Reinders. 2008. Probabilistic relevance ranking for collaborative filtering.Info. Retriev.11, 6 (2008), 477–497. [75] Yao Wu, Christopher DuBois, Alice X. Zheng, and Martin Ester. 2016. Collaborative denoising auto-encoders for top-n recommender systems. InProceedings of the 9th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM’16). 153–162. [76] Zhenghua Xu, Thomas Lukasiewicz, Cheng Chen, Yishu Miao, and Xiangwu Meng. 2017. Tag-aware personalized recommendation using a hybrid deep model. InProceedings of the 26th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI’17). 3196–3202.DOI:https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2017/446 [77] Hong-JianXue,XinyuDai,JianbingZhang,ShujianHuang,andJiajunChen.2017.Deepmatrixfactorizationmodels forrecommendersystems.In Proceedingsofthe26thInternationalJointConferenceonArtificialIntelligence(IJCAI’18) . 3203–3209. DOI:https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2017/447 [78] Wei Yang, Kuang Lu, Peilin Yang, and Jimmy Lin. 2019. Critically examining the neural hype: Weak baselines and the additivity of effectiveness gains from neural ranking models. InProceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR’19). 1129–1132. [79] QuanguiZhang,LongbingCao,ChengzhangZhu,ZhiqiangLi,andJinguangSun.2018.CoupledCF:Learningexplicit and implicit user-item couplings in recommendation for deep collaborative filtering. InProceedings of the 27th Inter- national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI’18). 3662–3668.DOI:https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2018/509 [80] ShuaiZhang,LinaYao,AixinSun,SenWang,GuodongLong,andManqingDong.2018.NeuRec:Onnonlineartrans- formation for personalized ranking. InProceedings of the 27th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI’18). 3669–3675. [81] LeiZheng,Chun-TaLu,FeiJiang,JiaweiZhang,andPhilipS.Yu.2018.Spectralcollaborativefiltering.In Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys’18). 311–319. Received November 2019; revised August 2020; accepted November 2020 ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 39, No. 2, Article 20. Publication date: January 2021.
