

===== PAGE 1 =====
User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction (2019) 29:527–572 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11257-018-9215-8 Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated music playlist continuation Andreu Vall 1 · Matthias Dorfer 1 · Hamid Eghbal-zadeh 1 · Markus Schedl 1 · Keki Burjorjee 3 · Gerhard Widmer 1,2 Received: 23 December 2017 / Accepted in revised form: 15 November 2018 / Published online: 9 April 2019 © The Author(s) 2019 Abstract Music recommender systems have become a key technology to support the interac- tion of users with the increasingly larger music catalogs of on-line music streaming services, on-line music shops, and personal devices. An important task in music rec- ommender systems is the automated continuation of music playlists, that enables the recommendation of music streams adapting to given (possibly short) listening ses- sions. Previous works have shown that applying collaborative ﬁltering to collections of curated music playlists reveals underlying playlist-song co-occurrence patterns that are useful to predict playlist continuations. However, most music collections exhibit a pronounced long-tailed distribution. The majority of songs occur only in few playlists and, as a consequence, they are poorly represented by collaborative ﬁltering. We introduce two feature-combination hybrid recommender systems that extend collabo- rative ﬁltering by integrating the collaborative information encoded in curated music playlists with any type of song feature vector representation. We conduct off-line experiments to assess the performance of the proposed systems to recover withheld playlist continuations, and we compare them to competitive pure and hybrid collab- orative ﬁltering baselines. The results of the experiments indicate that the introduced feature-combination hybrid recommender systems can more accurately predict ﬁtting playlist continuations as a result of their improved representation of songs occurring in few playlists. Keywords Automated music playlist continuation · Hybrid recommender systems · Cold-start problem · Music information retrieval · Feature extraction B Andreu V all andreu.vall@jku.at Extended author information available on the last page of the article 123

===== PAGE 2 =====
528 A. Vall et al. 1 Introduction Music recommender systems have become an important component of music plat- forms to assist users to navigate increasingly larger music collections. Recommendable items in the music domain may correspond to different entities such as songs, albums, or artists (Chen et al. 2016; Ricci et al. 2015, Chapter 13), and music streaming services even organize music in more abstract categories, like genre or activity. As a consequence of the relatively short time needed to listen to a song (compared to watching a movie or reading a book) a user session in an on-line music stream- ing service typically involves listening to, not one, but several songs. Thus, modeling and understanding music playlists is a central research goal in music recommender systems. As in other item domains, music recommender systems often provide per- sonalized lists of suggestions based on the users’ general music preferences. This approach may work to recommend music entities such as albums, artists, or ready- made listening sessions (like curated playlists or charts) because it can be useful to provide the users with a wide choice range. However, recommendations based on the users’ general music preferences may be too broad for the task of automated music playlist continuation, where it is crucial to recommend individual songs that speciﬁ- cally adapt to the most-recent songs played. A common approach to explicitly address the automated continuation of music playlists consists in applying Collaborative Filtering (CF) to curated music playlists, revealing specialized playlist-song co-occurrence patterns (Aizenberg et al.2012; Bon- nin and Jannach 2014). While this approach works fairly well, it has an important limitation: the performance of any CF system depends on the availability of sufﬁ- ciently dense training data (Adomavicius and Tuzhilin 2005). In particular, songs occurring in few playlists can not be properly modeled by CF because they are hardly related to other playlists and songs. Music collections generally exhibit a bias towards few, popular songs (Celma 2010). In the case of collections of curated music playlists, this translates into a vast majority of songs occurring only in very few playlists. This majority of infrequent songs is poorly represented by CF. To overcome this limitation, we observe that songs occurring rarely in the context of curated playlists are not necessarily completely unknown to us. We can often gather rich song-level side information from, e.g., the audio signal, text descriptions from social-tagging platforms, or even listening logs from music streaming services. Such additional song descriptions can be leveraged to make CF robust to infrequent songs by means of hybridization (Adomavicius and Tuzhilin 2005;B u r k e2002). We introduce two feature-combination hybrid recommender systems that inte- grate curated music playlists with any type of song feature vector derived from song descriptions. The curated music playlists provide playlist-song co-occurrence patterns as in CF approaches. The song features make the proposed systems robust to data scarcity problems. In contrast to previous hybrid playlist continuation approaches, the proposed systems are feature-combination hybrids (Burke 2002), having the advantage that the collaborative information and the song features are implicitly fused into standalone enhanced recommender systems. The proposed systems can be used to play and sequentially extend music streams, resulting in a lean-back 123

===== PAGE 3 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 529 listening experience similar to traditional radio broadcasting, or to assist users to ﬁnd ﬁtting songs to extend their own music playlists, stimulating their engage- ment. 1.1 Contributions of the paper – We provide a uniﬁed view of music playlist continuation as a matrix completion and expansion problem, encompassing – pure CF systems, solely exploiting curated playlists, – hybrid systems integrating curated playlists and song feature vectors. – We introduce two feature-combination hybrid recommender systems – readily applicable to automated music playlist continuation, – able to exploit any type of song feature vectors. – Still, the proposed systems are domain-agnostic. They can generally leverage – collaborative implicit feedback data from any domain, – item feature vectors from any domain and modality. – A thorough off-line evaluation comparing to pure and hybrid state-of-the-art CF baselines shows that, having access to comparable data, the proposed systems – compete to CF when sufﬁcient training data is available, – outperform CF when training data is scarce, – compete to, or outperform the hybrid baseline. – The proposed systems further improve their performance by considering richer song feature vectors, e.g., concatenating features from different modalities. – The evaluation also provides a complete comparison of – a widely-used matrix factorization CF system (Hu et al. 2008), – its audio-based hybrid extension (van den Oord et al. 2013), – a popular playlist-neighbors CF system (Bonnin and Jannach 2014). – The Appendix extends the evaluation of the proposed systems with a detailed analysis of the contribution of each type of song feature vector, showing – the standalone performance of each type of song feature vector, – the incremental gains of stepwise combinations of song feature vectors. – Implementations of the proposed hybrid recommender systems and of the consid- ered baselines are made available. 1 1.2 Scope of the paper Compiling a music playlist is a complex task. According to interviews with practi- tioners and postings to a playlist-sharing website, Cunningham et al. ( 2006) found that the playlist curation process is inﬂuenced by factors such as mood, theme, or 1 http://github.com/andreuvall/HybridPlaylistContinuation 123

===== PAGE 4 =====
530 A. Vall et al. purpose. They also observed a lack of agreement on curation rules, except for loose and subjective guidelines. Krause and North ( 2014) studied music listening in situ- ations. Among other conclusions, they found that participants of their study, when asked to compile playlists for speciﬁc situations, selected music seeking to comply with perceived social norms deﬁning what music ought to be present in each situation. The scope of our work is restricted to machine learning approaches to music rec- ommender systems. We focus on the exploitation of data describing playlists and the songs therein, in order to identify patterns useful to recommend playlist continuations. We acknowledge the complexity of the playlist curation process, and we are aware of the possible limitations of a pure machine-learning perspective. 1.3 Organization of the paper The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews previous works on music playlist continuation. Section 3 formulates music playlist continuation as a matrix completion and expansion problem. Sections 4 and 5 describe the proposed systems and the baselines for music playlist continuation, respectively. The evalua- tion methodology is presented in Section 6. Section 7 describes the datasets of curated playlists and song features used in our experiments. Section8 elaborates on the results. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 9. Additional details of each playlist con- tinuation system, additional song feature types, and additional results are provided in Appendices A, B and C, respectively. 2 Relatedwork Content-based recommender systems for automated music playlist continuation gen- erally compute pairwise song similarities on the basis of previously extracted song features and use these similarities to enforce content-wise smooth transitions. Such systems have typically relied on audio-based song features (Flexer et al. 2008; Logan 2002; Pohle et al. 2005), possibly combined with features extracted from social tags (McFee and Lanckriet 2011) or web-based data (Knees et al. 2006). While this approach is expected to yield coherent playlists, Lee et al. ( 2011) actually found that recommending music with stronger audio similarity does not necessarily translate to higher user satisfaction. This limitation relates to the so-called semantic gap in music information retrieval, that is, the distance between the raw audio signal of a song and a listener’s perception of the song (Celma et al. 2006). Collaborative Filtering (CF) has been proven successful to reveal underlying struc- ture from user-item interactions (Adomavicius and Tuzhilin 2005; Ricci et al. 2015). In particular, CF has been applied to music playlist continuation by considering col- lections of hand-curated playlists and regarding each playlist as a user’s listening history on the basis of which songs should be recommended. Previous research has mostly focused on playlist-neighbors CF systems (Bonnin and Jannach 2014;H a r i r i et al. 2012; Jannach et al. 2015), but Aizenberg et al. ( 2012) also presented a latent- factor CF model tailored to mine Internet radio stations, accounting for song, artist, 123

===== PAGE 5 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 531 time of the day, and song adjacency. An important limitation of most latent-factor and playlist-neighbors CF systems is that they need to proﬁle the playlists at training time in order to extend them, by computing their latent factors or ﬁnding their nearest neighbors. As a consequence, such systems can not extend playlists unseen at training time. To circumvent this issue, Aizenberg et al. ( 2012) replaced the latent factors of unseen playlists by the latent factors of their songs, and Jannach and Ludewig ( 2017) showed how to efﬁciently implement a playlist-neighbors CF system able to extend unseen playlists in reasonable time, even for large datasets. Song-neighbors CF sys- tems have also been investigated (V all et al. 2017b, 2019), and Bonnin and Jannach (2014) proposed a successful variation consisting in computing similarities between artists instead of between songs, even when the ultimate recommendations were at the song level. Their system also incorporated song popularity. A common limitation of all pure CF systems is that they are only aware of the songs occurring in training playlists. Thus, songs that never occurred in training playlists, to which we refer as “out-of-set” songs, can not be recommended in an informed manner. Furthermore, songs that do occur in training playlists, but seldom, are not properly modeled by CF because they lack connections to other playlists and songs. Other collaborative systems (i.e., systems based on the exploitation of playlist- song interactions) have been presented. Zheleva et al. (2010) proposed to adapt Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al. 2003) to modeling listening sessions. They found that a variation of LDA that speciﬁcally considers the sessions provided better recommendations than plain LDA. Chen et al. ( 2012) presented the Latent Markov Embedding, a model that exploits radio playlists to learn an embedding of songs into a Euclidean space such that the distance between embedded songs relates to their transition probability in the training playlists. Both systems can extend playlists unseen at training time, but can only make informed recommendations for songs occurring in training playlists. Hybrid systems combining collaborative and content information are a common approach to mitigate the difﬁculties of CF to represent infrequent songs. Hariri et al. (2012) represented the songs in hand-curated playlists by topic models derived from social tags and then mined frequent sequential patterns at the topic level. The rec- ommendations predicted by a playlist-neighbors CF system were re-ranked according to the next topics predicted. The approach proposed by Jannach et al. ( 2015)p r e - selected suitable next songs for a given playlist using a weighted combination of the scores yielded by a playlist-neighbors CF system and a content-based system. The candidate songs were then re-ranked to match some characteristic of the playlist being extended. In both cases the hybridization followed from the combination of independently obtained scores, by means of weighting heuristics or re-ranking. For songs occurring in few training playlists, the recommendations predicted by CF could be boosted with content information. However, the recommendations for out-of-set songs would solely rely on the content-based component of the hybrid systems. McFee and Lanckriet ( 2012) proposed a hybrid system integrating collaborative and content information more closely. The system was based on a weighted song hypergraph, that is, a song graph where edges can join multiple songs, and weights deﬁne the similarity between the (possibly many) songs connected by an edge. The edges were deﬁned by assigning the songs in hand-curated playlists to possibly over- 123

===== PAGE 6 =====
532 A. Vall et al. lapping song sets, which had been previously obtained through clustering of extracted multimodal song features. The weights were found in a second step as the best possible ﬁt given a collection of training playlists and the hypergraph edges. This system could better deal with out-of-set songs, as it would only need to assign them to appropriate edges. Not strictly applied to music playlist continuation but to music understanding and recommendation in general, van den Oord et al. ( 2013) introduced the use of con- volutional neural networks to estimate song factors from a latent-factor model, given the log-compressed mel-spectrogram of the audio signal of songs. Such networks can be essentially regarded as feature extraction tools, but further combined with latent- feature models they enable the informed recommendation of infrequent or out-of-set songs. This approach was further combined with semantic features derived from artist biographies by Oramas et al. ( 2017). Our own previous works on music playlist continuation focused on two main research lines. On the one hand we studied the importance of three main playlist characteristics (length, song order, and popularity of the songs included) in music playlist continuation systems (V all et al. 2017b, 2018b, 2019). On the other hand, more related to the current paper, we analyzed the extent to which multimodal fea- tures can capture playlist-song relationships, and we designed two feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for music playlist continuation (V all et al.2016, 2017a, 2018a). In the current work we consolidate the second line of research. We present the two feature-combination hybrid systems in full detail. We conduct an extensive evaluation, comparing the proposed systems to four competitive playlist continuation baselines, and incorporating uncertainty estimation by means of bootstrap conﬁdence intervals. We analyze additional audio-based features extracted applying convolutional neural networks on song spectrograms. Finally, the evaluation further provides new, insightful comparisons between well-established pure and hybrid CF systems, namely the matrix factorization model proposed by Hu et al. ( 2008), its hybrid extension pro- posed by van den Oord et al. ( 2013), and the playlist-neighbors CF system (Bonnin and Jannach 2014; Hariri et al. 2012; Jannach et al. 2015). 3 Problemformulation Let P be a collection of music playlists. Let S be the universe of songs available, including at least the set SP of songs occurring in the playlists of the collection P,b u t possibly more (i.e., S ⊇ SP ). A playlist p ∈ P is regarded as a set of songs, where the song order is ignored. 2 Playlists may have different lengths. Since playlists are seen as song sets, any playlist p is a subset of the universe of songs S. Thus, the set difference S\ p represents the songs that do not belong to the playlist p. A song s can be regarded as playlist of one song, i.e., as the singleton set{s}. Given a song s in a playlist p, the set difference p\{s} removes the song s from the playlist p. The length of a playlist p is denoted by its cardinality | p|. 2 Even though the process of listening to a playlist is inherently sequential, we found that considering the song order in curated music playlists is actually not crucial to extend such playlists (V all et al.2018b, 2019). While more research is required to fully understand the impact of the song order in music playlists, we feel conﬁdent that disregarding the song order does not harm the contribution of the current work. 123

===== PAGE 7 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 533 Fig. 1 Playlist continuation as a matrix completion and expansion problem. The matrix Y encodes the playlist collection P. CF systems discover in-set potential positive playlist-song interactions by “com- pleting” the matrix Y. Hybrid systems can further “expand” the matrix Y towards out-of-set songs by incorporating external song descriptions. Systems not specializing in the playlists of P can expand the matrix towards out-of-set playlists, possibly at the cost of slightly lower performance We refer to any playlist p ∈ P as an “in-set” playlist, and to any song s ∈ SP as an “in-set” song. In contrast, we refer to any playlist p /∈ P as an “out-of-set” playlist, and to any song s /∈ SP as an “out-of-set” song. 3.1 Playlist continuation as matrix completion While a single playlist typically reﬂects individual preferences, a collection of playlists constitutes a source of collaborative implicit feedback (Hu et al. 2008; Pan et al. 2008) encoding rich playlist-song co-occurrence patterns. Similar to other recommendation tasks, music playlist continuation can be regarded as a matrix completion problem. The playlist collection P is arranged into a binary matrixY ∈{ 0, 1}|P|×|SP| of playlist- song interactions, with as many rows as playlists and as many columns as unique songs in the playlists (Fig. 1). The interaction between a playlist p and a song s indicates whether the song occurs ( yp,s = 1) or not ( yp,s = 0) in the playlist. The matrix Y is typically very sparse and thus it can be stored efﬁciently by keeping only the positive interactions (e.g., the playlist collections introduced in Section 7 have both a density rate of 0.08%). “Completing” the matrix Y generally refers to discovering new potential positive playlist-song interactions. Songs identiﬁed as potential positive interactions to a given playlist are then recommended as candidates to extend the playlist. That is the approach followed by CF systems, both neighborhood-based (Bonnin and Jannach 2014;V a l l et al. 2017b, 2019) and model-based (Aizenberg et al. 2012). We evaluate two CF baselines, one model-based and one neighbors-based. For the model-based system, we adapt the matrix factorization model for implicit feedback datasets by Hu et al. ( 2008) for the task of music playlist continuation (Section 5.1). For the neighbors-based system, we modify the playlist-neighbors CF system (Bonnin and Jannach 2014; Hariri et al. 2012; Jannach et al. 2015) to adapt to the challenging sparsity of the considered playlist collections (Section 5.3). 123

===== PAGE 8 =====
534 A. Vall et al. 3.2 Playlist continuation as matrix expansion The matrix completion framework is limited to playlists and songs within the matrix. However, common use cases may require extending not-yet-seen playlists, or consid- ering candidate songs that do not occur in any of the playlists of the matrix. 3.2.1 Out-of-set songs CF systems rely solely on playlist-song co-occurrence patterns. Therefore, they are unable to recommend out-of-set songs as candidates to extend playlists, precisely because out-of-set songs do not co-occur with the playlists in the collection. Hybrid extensions to CF overcome this limitation by incorporating external song descriptions seeking to compensate for the lack of playlist-song co-occurrences. Hybrid systems can not only enable the recommendation of out-of-set songs (Fig.1) but also strengthen the representation of in-set but infrequent songs. The feature-combination hybrid recommender systems proposed in this work han- dle out-of-set and in-set but infrequent songs by fusing any type of song feature vectors with collaborative patterns derived from hand-curated music playlists (Sections 4.1 and 4.2). We also evaluate the hybrid CF system proposed by van den Oord et al. (2013), which predicts song latent factors from the audio signal and passes them to a matrix factorization model. We extend this latter approach by additionally considering song latent factors derived from independent listening logs (Section 5.2). 3.2.2 Out-of-set playlists Model-based CF systems relying on matrix factorization are not generally able to extend playlists unseen at training time. However, we see that this limitation can be overcome for the matrix factorization model considered in this work (Hu et al. 2008), and we show how to predict continuations for out-of-set playlists (Fig. 1) provided that latent song factors are available (Section 5.1.3). Neighbors-based CF systems can generally extend out-of-set playlists. Still, playlist-neighbors CF systems require a careful implementation to efﬁciently compute the similarity between out-of-set playlists and large training playlist collections (Bon- nin and Jannach 2014, Appendix A.1). This computation can be accelerated by sampling a subset of the training playlists (Jannach and Ludewig 2017). The mod- erate size of the playlist collections considered in this work, however, does not make it necessary to apply such sampling (Section 5.3). The ﬁrst of the hybrid systems proposed in this work specializes towards the collection of training playlists (Section 4.1). It achieves a very competitive per- formance, but it is not readily able to extend out-of-set playlists. The second hybrid system is designed to generally model whether any playlist and any song ﬁt together (Section 4.2). It achieves slightly lower performance but it can handle out-of-set playlists. 123

===== PAGE 9 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 535 3.3 Recommending playlist continuations A playlist continuation system has to be able to predict a score quantifying the ﬁtness between a playlist p and a candidate song s. This score may be interpreted as a probability (e.g., in the proposed systems) or as a similarity measure (e.g., in neighbors- based CF systems). After assessing the ﬁtness between a playlist and multiple song candidates, we select the most suitable song recommendations to extend the playlist. 4 Proposedsystems We introduce two hybrid feature-combination recommender systems. The feature- combination hybridization scheme integrates collaborative and content information treating the collaborative information as an additional feature associated to each playlist-song pair (Burke 2002). The hybridization results in an enhanced, stan- dalone system, informed about both types of information. This is in contrast to other hybridization schemes that simply combine the predictions of independent systems. 4.1 Profiles-based playlist continuation (“Profiles”) This system specializes towards a playlist collection by means of a song-to-playlist classiﬁer. As a consequence of this specialization, Proﬁles achieves very compet- itive performance, but it is not readily able to extend out-of-set playlists. This system should be used to recommend songs to stable user playlists. If new playlists needed to be considered, the song-to-playlist classiﬁer could be extended using incre- mental training techniques (Li and Hoiem 2017). Proﬁles can deal with out-of-set songs. 4.1.1 Model deﬁnition A song s is represented by a feature vectorx s ∈ RD . We are interested in the probability of song s ﬁtting each of the playlists of a collection P. The system is based on a song-to-playlist classiﬁer implemented by a neural network c: RD → R|P|. The network takes the song feature xs as input. The output c(xs) ∈ R|P| is pointwise passed through logistic activation functions,3 yielding a vector ˆys = σ ( c(xs) ) ∈[ 0, 1]|P| that indicates the predicted probability of song s ﬁtting each of the playlists in the collection P (Fig. 2). The song-to-playlist classiﬁer depends on a set of learnable weights θc (omitted so far for simplicity). The weights are adjusted on the basis of training examples {xs, ys} (Section 4.1.2) by comparing the model’s predicted probabilities to the actual labels ys ∈{ 0, 1}|P|. Precisely, the weights θc are estimated to minimize the following binary cross-entropy cost function 3 The song-to-playlist classiﬁer makes as many independent decisions as playlists in the collection P.W e also experimented with a softmax activation function yielding a probability distribution over playlists, but using sigmoids provided better results according to the followed evaluation methodology (Section 6). 123

===== PAGE 10 =====
536 A. Vall et al. Fig. 2 Sketch of the Proﬁles system. A song feature vector is taken as input and processed through the network to decide the playlists of P that the song ﬁts. The model is trained on labeled song-to-playlist examples LProﬁles ( θc |{ xs, ys} ) = − ∑ p,s yp,s log ( ˆyp,s ) + ( 1 − yp,s ) log ( 1 −ˆyp,s ) . (1) The terms yp,s and ˆyp,s denote the components ofys and ˆys corresponding to playlist p, respectively. The dimensionality of the set of parameters θc depends on the network architecture. The summation is done over all the possible playlist-song pairs, both occurring ( yp,s = 1) and non-occurring ( yp,s = 0) in the training playlists. We experimented with different weighting schemes for occurring and non-occurring pairs, as suggested by Hu et al. ( 2008) or Pan et al. ( 2008), but none yielded superior performance than using equal weights. 4.1.2 Song-to-playlist training examples SP is the set of unique songs in the playlists of P. For each song s ∈ SP , ys ∈{ 0, 1}|P| is the column of the playlist-song interactions matrixY corresponding to song s, which indicates the playlists of P to which the song s belongs. The training set consists of all the pairs of song features and playlist-indicator binary vectors {xs, ys}s∈SP . 4.2 Membership-based playlist continuation (“Membership”) This system generally models playlist-song membership relationships, that is, whether a given playlist and a given song ﬁt together. This approach is related to the Proﬁles system, but here we seek to discourage the specialization towards speciﬁc playlists by generally representing any playlist by the feature vectors of the songs that it contains. In this way, Membership can deal with out-of-set playlists and out-of-set songs. 4.2.1 Model deﬁnition A playlist p is represented by a feature matrix X p ∈ R| p|×D that contains, in each row, the feature vector of each song in the playlist. A song s is represented by a feature vector xs ∈ RD . A playlist-song pair ( p, s) is then represented by the features( Xp, xs ) . The system is based on a deep neural network with a “feature-transformation” com- ponent t: RD → RH and a “match-discrimination” component d : R2H →[ 0, 1]. The playlist feature matrix Xp is transformed song-wise (i.e., row-wise) into a hid- den matrix representation t(Xp) ∈ R| p|×H (where we slightly abuse notation for t). 123

===== PAGE 11 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 537 Fig. 3 Sketch of the Membership system. Given any playlist-song pair, its feature matrix and vector are transformed into hidden representations that are then used to decide if the playlist-song pair ﬁts together. The model is trained on labeled playlist-song pairs derived from Algorithm 1 This matrix is averaged over songs yielding a summarized playlist feature vector avg(t(Xp)) ∈ RH . The song feature vector xs is also transformed into a hidden representation t(xs) ∈ RH . Both hidden representations are passed through the match- discrimination component that predicts the probability of the playlist-song pair ﬁtting together, ˆyp,s = d ( avg(t(Xp)), t(xs) ) ∈[ 0, 1] (Fig. 3). The transformation and match-discrimination components depend on sets of learn- able weights θt and θd , respectively (omitted so far for simplicity). These are adjusted on the basis of training examples {(Xp, xs), yp,s} (Section 4.2.2) by comparing the model’s predicted probability for a pair ( p, s) to the actual label yp,s ∈{ 0, 1}.P r e - cisely, the sets of weights θt, θd are estimated to minimize the following binary cross-entropy cost function LMembership ( θt,θd ⏐⏐ { (Xp, xs), yp,s }) = − ∑ p,s yp,s log ( ˆyp,s ) + ( 1 − yp,s ) log ( 1 −ˆyp,s ) . (2) The dimensionalities of the sets of parameters θt and θd depend on the network architecture. 4.2.2 Playlist-song training examples We assume that any playlist p ∈ P implicitly deﬁnes matches to each of its own songs. That is, each song s ∈ p matches the shortened playlist ps = p\{s}.W e further assume that any song not occurring in the playlist p is a “mismatch” to the shortened playlist ps .4 Thus, we can obtain a mismatch by randomly drawing a song from S\ p. Following this procedure, Algorithm 1 details how to derive a training set with as many matching as mismatching playlist-song pairs given a playlist collection P and a universe of available songs S. 4 In the context of implicit feedback, the term “no-match” may be preferable to “mismatch” because missing feedback does not necessarily reﬂect negative feedback. However, we keep the latter for simplicity. 123

===== PAGE 12 =====
538 A. Vall et al. Algorithm 1 Derive playlist-song matches and mismatches. Input: P ⊿ playlist collection S ⊿ universe of songs Output: matches ⊿ list of playlist-song matches mismatches ⊿ list of playlist-song mismatches 1: matches = [] ⊿ initialize empty lists 2: mismatches = [] 3: for each p ∈ P do 4: for each s ∈ p do 5: ps = p\{s}⊿ remove s from p 6: s+ = s ⊿ s is a match to ps 7: s− = sample(S\ p) ⊿ draw a mismatch to ps 8: matches.append (( Xps , xs+ ) , 1 ) ⊿ store training examples 9: mismatches.append (( Xps , xs− ) , 0 ) 10: end for 11: end for 12: return matches, mismatches 4.2.3 Sampling strategy The Membership system can be utilized as we have described so far. However, we ﬁnd that applying the following sampling strategy before we derive the training playlist- song pairs and at recommendation time is necessary to obtain competitive results. We set a ﬁx playlist lengthn given by the length of the shortest playlist in a collection P. Given a playlist p ∈ P, we derive all the sub-playlists p′ that result from drawing n songs from p without replacement. However, the number of possible draws can be large. To keep the approach computationally tractable, if the number of possible draws is larger than | p|, we select only | p| sub-playlists by randomly drawing n songs from p without replacement | p| times.5 We apply this procedure to each playlist of P, thus obtaining a modiﬁed playlist collection P′ with many more, but shorter ﬁx-length playlists. Then, we apply Algo- rithm 1 to the modiﬁed collection P′ to derive training playlist-song pairs. Once Membership is trained, we also apply the sampling strategy to predict the match probability of an unseen playlist-song pair ( p, s). We derive no more than | p| sub-playlists out of p as described above. We let Membership predict the match probability of ( p′, s) for each derived sub-playlist p′. Then we average the probabilities. 5 The number of possible sub-playlists is (| p| n ) . For example, we could sample 2002 sub-playlists of length 5 out of a playlist of length 14. In this case, we would randomly draw 14 sub-playlists of length 5. 123

===== PAGE 13 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 539 5 Baselinesystems 5.1 Matrix-factorization-based playlist continuation (“MF”) This is a purely collaborative system based on the weighted matrix factorization model proposed by Hu et al. ( 2008). As any pure CF system, it is unable to recommend out- of-set songs. In principle it is also unable to extend out-of-set playlists, but we see how to overcome this limitation with a fast one-step factorization update (Section 5.1.3). 5.1.1 Model deﬁnition We factorize the matrix of playlist-song interactions Y ∈{ 0, 1}|P|×|SP| into two low-rank matrices u ∈ R|P|×D , v ∈ R|SP|×D of playlist and song latent factors, respectively, where D is the depth of the factorization and the product ˆY = u · vT approximately reconstructs the original matrix Y. Precisely, the latent factors are esti- mated to minimize the following weighted least squares cost function LMF ( u, v ⏐⏐ Y ) = ∑ p,s wp,s ( yp,s − up · vT s ) 2 , (3) where wp,s is the weight assigned to the playlist-song pair ( p, s). Following Hu et al. (2008), we deﬁne the weights by wp,s = 1 + αyp,s , where α is a parameter adjusted on a validation set. However, since the matrix Y is binary, the weighting scheme is reduced to wp,s = { w1 if yp,s = 1 1i f yp,s = 0, and the weight w1 is adjusted on a validation set. 5.1.2 Minimization via alternating least squares The cost function ( 3) is minimized via Alternating Least Squares (ALS), an iterative optimization procedure consisting in subsequently keeping one of the factor matrices ﬁxed while the other is updated. The initial factor matrices u0, v0 are set randomly. At iteration k, the song factors vk are obtained by minimizing an approximation of the original cost function where the playlist factors have been ﬁxed to uk : ˜LMF ( v ⏐⏐ u = uk, Y ) = ∑ p,s wp,s ( yp,s − uk p · vT s ) 2 . (4) 123

===== PAGE 14 =====
540 A. Vall et al. The playlist factorsuk+1 for the next iteration are obtained analogously, by minimizing the approximate cost function where the song factors have been ﬁxed to vk : ˜LMF ( u ⏐⏐ v = vk, Y ) = ∑ p,s wp,s ( yp,s − up · vkT s ) 2 . (5) The approximate cost functions (4) and (5), where one of the factor matrices has been ﬁxed, become quadratic on the other, unknown factor matrix. Thus, they have a unique minimum and it can be found exactly. At each iteration, the original cost function ( 3) is expected to move closer to a local minimum and the procedure is repeated until convergence. 5.1.3 Extension of out-of-set playlists In principle, CF systems based on matrix factorization can only extend in-set playlists, for which latent playlist factors have been pre-computed at training time. However, we observe that ALS enables a fast procedure to obtain reliable playlist factors for out-of-set playlists. Firstly, we have to insist that ALS is an iterative optimization procedure whose updates are solved exactly. Given the song factors matrix v ∗, one update solving for cost function ( 5) yields the playlist factors matrix u∗ deterministically. As an example, imagine two independent optimization processes factorizing the same matrix but initialized differently. If, by chance, both processes reached the same song factors matrix v∗ at whichever iteration, then both processes would derive u∗ as the next playlist factors matrix, regardless of when and how they had arrived at v∗ in the ﬁrst place. A simple corollary of this observation is that, given the song factors matrix v∗, the playlist factors matrix u∗ derived next is always an equally good solution, regardless of how many ALS iterations had occurred before arriving at v∗. Assume that the playlist collections P and P′ are disjoint. We are interested in predicting continuations for the playlists in the collection P′, but at training time we only have access to the collection P. Even though the playlist collections are disjoint, the songs within them are likely not. We arrange the collections P and P′ into respective matrices Y and Y′ of playlist-song interactions. We factorize the matrix Y until convergence and keep only the song factors v∗. We can now perform one ALS update solving for the following cost function, which is similar to cost function ( 5) but combines the song factors v∗ (derived from Y) with the matrix Y′: ˜LOut-of-set ( u ⏐⏐ v = v∗, Y′) = ∑ p,s wp,s ( y′ p,s − up · v∗T s ) 2 . (6) This yields playlist factors u′ for the playlists in P′. We can ﬁnally predict extensions for the playlists in P′ by reconstructing ˆY′ = u′ · v∗T . Even though the playlist factors are the result of a single ALS update, they are as reliable as the song factors used to derive them. This follows from the reasoning 123

===== PAGE 15 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 541 presented above, together with the condition that matrix Y′ is not much more sparse than Y, as this could degrade the results. 5.2 Hybrid matrix-factorization-based playlist continuation (“Hybrid MF”) This is a hybrid extension to the just-presented weighted matrix factorization model for implicit feedback datasets (Section 5.1). It is based on the exploitation of song latent factors derived from sources other than the playlist-song matrix Y, and it is enabled by an appropriate application of the ALS procedure. This is a hybrid system because the song latent factors are derived from independent song descriptions, such as independent listening logs (Section 7.2.1) or the audio signal (Section 7.2.2). Let ve be a song factors matrix corresponding to the songs in Y but derived from external song descriptions. We perform one ALS update solving for cost function (5) but replacing vk by ve. This yields a playlist factors matrix u correspond- ing to the playlists in Y. We can then predict recommendations by reconstructing ˆY = u · veT . Using this system is not advised when the matrix Y contains sufﬁcient training data. However, it can be helpful to deal with infrequent songs (poorly represented by pure CF), and it enables the recommendation of out-of-set songs. The distinction between in-set and out-of-set playlists is not meaningful for this system because the song latent factors are derived independently from any playlist collection. Then, one ALS iteration adapts to whichever playlist collection is being considered. 5.3 Playlist-neighbors-based playlist continuation (“Neighbors”) This is a CF system based on playlist-to-playlist similarities. A playlistp is represented by a binary vector s p ∈{ 0, 1}|S| indicating the songs that it includes. The similarity of a pair of playlists p, q is computed as the cosine between sp and sq , i,.e., sim( p, q) = cos(sp, sq) = sp · sq ∥sp∥∥sq∥ .( 7 ) Given a reference playlist collection P, the score assigned to a song s as a candidate to extend a playlist p (which need not belong to P) is computed as score(s, p) = ∑ q∈P(s) sim( p, q), (8) where P(s) are the playlists from the collection P that contain the song s. The system considers the song s to be a suitable continuation for the playlist p if s has occurred in playlists of the collection P that are similar to p. This system is closely related to the playlist-based k-nearest neighbors system (Bonnin and Jannach 2014;H a r i r ie ta l .2012; Jannach et al. 2015). The difference is that we consider the whole collectionP as the neighborhood ofp instead of considering only the k playlists most-similar to p. We found in preliminary experiments that, given 123

===== PAGE 16 =====
542 A. Vall et al. the sparsity of the playlist collections, considering as many neighbors as possible is beneﬁcial for the computation of the playlist-song scores. 5.4 Popularity-based playlist continuation (“Popularity”) This system computes the popularity of a song s according to its relative frequency in a reference playlist collection P, i.e., pop(s) = |P(s)| |P| , (9) where P(s) are the playlists from the collection P that contain the song s. Candidate songs to extend a playlist are ranked by their popularity. 5.5 Random playlist continuation (“Random”) This is a dummy system included as a reference. The ﬁtness of any playlist-song pair ( p, s) is randomly drawn from a uniform distribution U[0, 1]. 6 Evaluation We conduct off-line experiments to assess the performance of the playlist continuation systems. Following the evaluation approaches used in the literature (Aizenberg et al. 2012; Bonnin and Jannach 2014; Hariri et al. 2012; Jannach et al. 2015), we devise a retrieval-based task to measure the ability of the systems to recover withheld playlist continuations. Even though off-line experiments can not directly assess the user satis- faction as user experiments do, they provide a controlled and reproducible approach to compare different systems. 6.1 Off-line experiment Given a playlist p, we assume that a continuation pc, proportionally shorter than p,i s known and withheld for test. For example, if continuations were set to have a length of 25% their original playlist length, two playlists of 8 and 12 songs would have contin- uations of 2 and 3 songs, respectively. This follows the evaluation methodology used by Aizenberg et al. (2012) but differs from the one used by Hariri et al. (2012), Bonnin and Jannach (2014), and Jannach et al. (2015), where the withheld continuations have always one song regardless of the length of the playlist p. We let the system under evaluation predict the ﬁtness of the playlist-song pair( p, s) for each song s ∈ S\ p. The set of recommendable songs is restricted to S\ p not to recommend songs from the very playlist p. We rank the candidate songs in the order of preference to extend p given by the system predictions. On the basis of this ordered list of song candidates, we compute rank-based metrics reﬂecting the ability of the system to recover the songs from the playlist continuation p c. We ﬁnd the rank that each song 123

===== PAGE 17 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 543 Fig. 4 Illustration of the off-line experiment for one playlist. A system extends the playlist p = (s3, s6, s2). It ranks all the songs available according to its predictions, leaving out the songs in the playlist p. The songs in the continuation pc = (s1, s4) attain, respectively, ranks 3 and 1 in the ordered list of candidate songs. The ﬁrst hit is at rank 1, thus the continuation’s reciprocal rank is 1 1 . If we recommend the top-2 results, one of the two is a hit, therefore the continuation’s recall@2 is 1 2 in the withheld continuation pc occupies within the ordered list of song candidates. We compute two additional metrics for the continuation pc as a whole: the reciprocal rank, i.e., the inverse of the top-most rank achieved by a song from pc within the ordered list of song candidates, and the recall@100, i.e., the amount of songs from pc within the top 100 positions of the ordered list of song candidates (Fig. 4) (Manning et al. 2009, Chapter 8). This process is repeated for all the playlists we set to extend. We ﬁnally report the median rank over all the songs in all the continuations, the mean reciprocal rank (MRR) over all the continuations, and the mean recall@100 (R@100) over all the continuations. We construct 95% basic bootstrap conﬁdence intervals for each of the reported metrics (DiCiccio and Efron1996). Since these are not necessarily symmetric, to avoid clutter in the tables, we will show the nominal metric value plus/minus the largest margin. For example, a median rank of 1091 with a conﬁdence interval of (1001, 1162) will not be reported as 1001 ± 71 90, but as 1001 ± 90. 6.2 Weak and strong generalization We consider two evaluation settings as proposed by Aizenberg et al. ( 2012). The ﬁrst setting, or “weak generalization” setting, assumes that only one playlist collection P is available. The playlists are used to train a playlist continuation system. Then, the system recommends continuations to the very training playlists. The second setting, or “strong generalization” setting, assumes that two disjoint playlist collections P and P ′ are available. The playlists in the collection P are used to train a playlist continuation system. Then, the system recommends continuations to the playlists in the collection P′, which it has not seen before. 7 Datasets We compile two datasets, each consisting of a collection of hand-curated music playlists and feature vectors for each of the songs in the playlists. 123

===== PAGE 18 =====
544 A. Vall et al. The playlists are derived from Art of the Mix 6 and 8tracks,7 two on-line platforms where music aﬁcionados can publish their playlists. Previous research in automated music playlist continuation has focused on these databases precisely because of the presumable careful curation of their playlists (Bonnin and Jannach 2014; Hariri et al. 2012; Jannach et al. 2015; McFee and Lanckriet 2011, 2012). The song feature vectors are extracted from song audio clips gathered from the content provider 7digital, 8 and from social tags and listening logs obtained from the Million Song Dataset (MSD) 9 (Bertin-Mahieux et al. 2011), a public database pro- viding an heterogeneous collection of data for a million contemporary songs. 7.1 Playlist collections For Art of the Mix, we use the playlists published in the AotM-2011 dataset, a publicly available corpus of playlists crawled by McFee and Lanckriet ( 2012). The songs in the playlists that also belong to the MSD come properly identiﬁed. For 8tracks, we are given access to a private corpus of playlists. These playlists are represented by plain- text song titles and artist names. We match them against the MSD to get access to song-level descriptions and for comparability with the AotM-2011 dataset. The songs that are not present in the MSD are dropped from both playlist collections because we can not extract feature vectors without their song-level descriptions. 7.1.1 Playlist ﬁltering We presume that playlists with several songs by the same artist or from the same album may correspond to a not so careful compilation process (e.g., saving a full album as a playlist). We also observe that social tags, which we use for feature extraction, can contain artist or album information. Therefore, we decide not to consider artist- and album-themed playlists to ensure the quality of the playlists and to prevent leaking artist or album information into the evaluation. We keep only playlists with at least 7 unique artists and with a maximum of 2 songs per artist (the thresholds were manually chosen to yield sufﬁcient playlists after the whole ﬁltering process). This type of ﬁltering, which we already proposed in our previous works (V all et al. 2017a, b, 2018a, b, 2019), has also been adopted in the RecSys Challenge 2018. 10 On the other hand, other previous works have typically not ﬁltered the playlists by such criteria (Hariri et al. 2012; McFee and Lanckriet 2011, 2012) and have even investigated the exploitation of artist co-occurrences (Bonnin and Jannach 2014). We believe that either approach conditions the type of patterns that playlist continuation systems will identify. Thus, ﬁltering the playlists or not can be regarded as a design choice depending on the use case and the target users. 6 http://www.artofthemix.org 7 https://8tracks.com 8 https://www.7digital.com 9 https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong 10 https://recsys-challenge.spotify.com/details 123

===== PAGE 19 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 545 Table 1 Descriptive statistics for the AotM-2011 and the 8tracks playlist collections Dataset Statistic Min 1q Med 3q Max AotM-2011 Playlist length 5 7 9 11 26 Artists per playlist 4 7 9 11 26 Song frequency 1 1 1 2 42 8tracks Playlist length 5 8 10 12 38 Artists per playlist 3 8 10 11 34 Song frequency 1 1 1 2 140 We report the distribution of playlist lengths, number of artists per playlist, and song frequency in the dataset (i.e., the number of playlists in which each song occurs) To ensure that the playlist continuation systems learn from playlists of sufﬁcient length, we further keep only the playlists with at least 14 songs. The ﬁnal length of the playlists may still be shortened because we drop songs missing some type of song- level description, for which we can not extract all the feature vector types. Finally, in order to set up training and evaluation playlist splits, we discard playlists that have become shorter than 5 songs after the song ﬁltering. The ﬁltered AotM-2011 dataset has 2711 playlists with 12,286 songs by 4080 artists. The ﬁltered 8tracks dataset has 3269 playlists with 14,552 songs by 5104 artists. Detailed statistics for the ﬁnal playlist collections are provided in Table 1. 7.1.2 Playlist splits We create training and test playlist splits for the weak and strong generalization set- tings. For the weak generalization setting, we split each playlist leaving approximately the ﬁnal 20% of the songs as a withheld continuation. For the strong generalization setting, we split each playlist collection into 5 disjoint sub-collections for cross val- idation. At each iteration, 4 disjoint sub-collections are put together for training and the playlists therein are not split. The playlists in the remaining sub-collection are used for evaluation and are split as in the weak generalization setting (Fig. 5). The playlists in the training splits of both generalization settings are further split leaving approximately the ﬁnal 20% of the songs as withheld continuations for validation. 7.2 Song features For all the feature types we extract 200-dimensional vectors. According to our exper- iments, feature vectors of this dimensionality carry enough information. 7.2.1 Latent factors from independent listening logs (“Logs”) The Echo Nest Taste Proﬁle Subset 11 is a dataset of user listening histories from undisclosed partners. It contains (user , song, play-count) triplets for songs included 11 https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/tasteproﬁle 123

===== PAGE 20 =====
546 A. Vall et al. Fig. 5 Illustration of the playlist splits. In the weak generalization setting every playlist is split withholding the last songs as a continuation. In the strong generalization setting the playlist collection is split into disjoint sub-collections. One sub-collection is used to train the system. Every playlist in the other sub-collection is split withholding the last songs as a continuation. The red stripes indicate the playlists used to train the systems. The blue stripes indicate the playlists that the systems have to extend. The green stripes indicate the withheld continuations used for evaluation (color ﬁgure online) in the MSD. We factorize the triplets using the already discussed weighted matrix factorization model for implicit feedback datasets (Hu et al. 2008) with a factorization depth of 200 dimensions. However, the weighting scheme now depends on the play- counts. We use the obtained song latent factors as song feature vectors. 7.2.2 Latent factors from audio signal (“Audio2CF”) Following the work by van den Oord et al. ( 2013), we build a feature extractor to predict collaborative ﬁltering song factors from song spectrograms. We use a con- volutional neural network inspired by the VGG-style architecture (Simonyan et al. 2014) consisting of sequences of 3 × 3 convolution stacks followed by 2 × 2m a x pooling. To reduce the dimensionality of the network output to the predeﬁned song factor dimensionality, we insert, as a ﬁnal building block, a 1 × 1 convolution having 200 feature maps followed by global average pooling (Lin et al. 2013). We assemble a training set for the feature extractor using the latent factors of the songs from the Echo Nest Taste Proﬁle Subset (Section 7.2.1) and the corresponding audio previews downloaded from 7digital. To prevent leaking information, we discard the songs present in the playlist collections. We use the trained feature extractor to predict song latent factors for the songs in the playlist collections, given audio snippets that we also download from 7digital. 7.2.3 Semantic features from social tags (“Tags”) The Last.fm Dataset 12 gathers social tags that users of the on-line music service Last.fm13 assigned to songs included in the MSD. Along with the tag strings, the 12 https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/lastfm 13 https://www.last.fm 123

===== PAGE 21 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 547 Table 2 Weak generalization results for the AotM-2011 dataset System Feature N Med rank MRR [%] R@100 [%] Proﬁles Audio2CF + Tags + Logs 4473 891 ± 63 2 .49 ± 0.41 15 .91 ± 1.23 Logs 4473 1091 ± 90 1.91 ± 0.33 13.34 ± 1.12 Audio2CF 4473 2298 ± 127 0 .75 ± 0.20 6 .68 ± 0.83 Membership Audio2CF + Tags + Logs 4473 1052 ± 73 2 .18 ± 0.37 14 .88 ± 1.16 Logs 4473 1391 ± 101 1.71 ± 0.34 11.25 ± 1.01 Audio2CF 4473 2042 ± 113 1.08 ± 0.25 7 .56 ± 0.88 MF – 2835 1572 ± 150 2.21 ± 0.45 13.50 ± 1.36 Hybrid MF Logs 4473 2404 ± 164 1 .47 ± 0.32 8 .86 ± 0.92 Audio2CF 4473 2921 ± 164 0 .74 ± 0.21 5 .60 ± 0.77 Neighbors – 2835 5112 ± 321 2.66 ± 0.55 11.84 ± 1.28 Popularity – 4473 5217 ± 570 1 .03 ± 0.27 6 .34 ± 0.80 Random – 4473 6163 ± 218 0 .10 ± 0.03 0 .98 ± 0.34 The ﬁrst two columns indicate the system and feature names (if any). The third column indicates the number N of songs in the withheld continuations involved in each experiment. MF and Neighbors, only evaluated for in-set songs, are displayed in italics. The median rank is relative to 12,286 unique songs. Lower is better. For MRR and R@100 higher is better. Systems clearly outperforming the best result of Hybrid MF (non-overlapping 95% CIs) are indicated in bold. MF or Neighbors clearly outperforming one another are indicated in italic bold dataset provides relevance weights describing how well a particular tag applies to a song, as returned by the tracks.getTopTags function of the Last.fm API. 14 We extract semantic features from the tags assigned to a song using word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013). Even though we have experimented with word2vec models trained on very large text corpora (e.g., on GoogleNews15), we obtain best results using models trained on custom, smaller but music-informed text corpora. More details can be found in our previous works (V all et al. 2017a, 2018a). For each unique song in the playlists, we look up its social tags in the music- informed word2vec model. If a tag is a compound of several words (e.g., “pop rock”), we compute the average feature. Since a song may have several tags, the ﬁnal semantic feature is the weighted average of all its tags’ features, where the weights are the relevance weights provided by the Last.fm Dataset. 8 Results Tables 2, 3, 4 and 5 report the results achieved in the weak and strong generalization settings, respectively. The Proﬁles system can only operate in weak generalization and therefore it only appears in Tables 2 and 3. The purely collaborative systems, i.e., MF and Neighbors, can not predict scores for out-of-set songs. During the evaluation of these systems, if a withheld continuation contains an out-of-set song, it is simply 14 https://www.last.fm/api/show/track.getTopTags 15 https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec 123

===== PAGE 22 =====
548 A. Vall et al. Table 3 Weak generalization results for the 8tracks dataset System Feature N Med rank MRR [%] R@100 [%] Proﬁles Audio2CF + Tags + Logs 6289 556 ± 38 3 .90 ± 0.43 23 .51 ± 1.21 Logs 6289 718 ± 58 3 .62 ± 0.44⋆ 20.03 ± 1.12 Audio2CF 6289 1988 ± 90 1 .13 ± 0.24 8 .21 ± 0.80 Membership Audio2CF + Tags + Logs 6289 652 ± 46 3 .73 ± 0.44 20 .43 ± 1.12 Logs 6289 986 ± 68 2.89 ± 0.37 16 .92 ± 1.04 Audio2CF 6289 1149 ± 69 2.49 ± 0.35 15 .50 ± 1.02 MF – 4299 1198 ± 145 4.04 ± 0.56 18.62 ± 1.29 Hybrid MF Logs 6289 1677 ± 138 2 .79 ± 0.41 15 .88 ± 1.05 Audio2CF 6289 2636 ± 142 1 .09 ± 0.24 7 .03 ± 0.75 Neighbors – 4299 3566 ± 318 4.93 ± 0.64 19.50 ± 1.32 Popularity – 6289 3352 ± 272 1 .80 ± 0.33 9 .71 ± 0.81 Random – 6289 7094 ± 234 0 .15 ± 0.06 0 .78 ± 0.24 The ﬁrst two columns indicate the system and feature names (if any). The third column indicates the number N of songs in the withheld continuations involved in each experiment. MF and Neighbors, only evaluated for in-set songs, are displayed in italics. The median rank is relative to 14,552 unique songs. Lower is better. For MRR and R@100 higher is better. Systems clearly outperforming the best result of Hybrid MF (non-overlapping 95% CIs) are indicated in bold. MF or Neighbors clearly outperforming one another are indicated in italic bold ⋆ The 95% bootstrap CIs for the MRR of Proﬁles (Logs) and Hybrid MF (Logs) do not overlap. However, this is not apparent from the table because, for readability, we only display the largest margin of the CIs Table 4 Strong generalization results for the AotM-2011 dataset System Feature N Med rank MRR [%] R@100 [%] Membership Audio2CF + Tags + Logs 4473 1150 ± 72 1.88 ± 0.33 13.69 ± 1.13 Logs 4473 1552 ± 96 1.42 ± 0.29 10 .71 ± 1.04 Audio2CF 4473 2065 ± 120 0.93 ± 0.21 7 .05 ± 0.85 MF – 2849 1428 ± 135 2.72 ± 0.53 15.43 ± 1.44 Hybrid MF Logs 4473 2404 ± 164 1 .47 ± 0.31 8 .86 ± 0.94 Audio2CF 4473 2921 ± 164 0 .74 ± 0.21 5 .60 ± 0.78 Neighbors – 2849 4502 ± 304 4.89 ± 0.82 15.16 ± 1.43 Popularity – 4473 5143 ± 583 1 .03 ± 0.27 7 .28 ± 0.85 Random – 4473 6161 ± 188 0 .13 ± 0.05 1 .23 ± 0.37 The ﬁrst two columns indicate the system and feature names (if any). The third column indicates the number N of songs in the withheld continuations involved in each experiment. MF and Neighbors, only evaluated for in-set songs, are displayed in italics. The median rank is relative to 12,286 unique songs. Lower is better. For MRR and R@100 higher is better. Systems clearly outperforming the best result of Hybrid MF (non-overlapping 95% CIs) are indicated in bold. MF or Neighbors clearly outperforming one another are indicated in italic bold ignored. Thus, the overall performance of MF and Neighbors is not directly comparable to the performance of the other systems. To make this information clear, Tables 2, 3, 4 and 5 report the number N of songs in the withheld continuations that each system 123

===== PAGE 23 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 549 Table 5 Strong generalization results for the 8tracks dataset System Feature N Med rank MRR [%] R@100 [%] Membership Audio2CF + Tags + Logs 6289 710 ± 51 3.46 ± 0.43 20.40 ± 1.12 Logs 6289 1038 ± 78 2.85 ± 0.39 15 .90 ± 1.03 Audio2CF 6289 1317 ± 86 2.58 ± 0.37 14 .54 ± 0.99 MF – 4298 997.5 ± 109.5 4.48 ± 0.61 20.32 ± 1.35 Hybrid MF Logs 6289 1677 ± 138 2 .79 ± 0.41 15 .88 ± 1.04 Audio2CF 6289 2636 ± 142 1 .09 ± 0.24 7 .03 ± 0.75 Neighbors – 4298 3045.5 ± 390.5 5.27 ± 0.68 20.43 ± 1.41 Popularity – 6289 3293 ± 278 1 .76 ± 0.32 9 .32 ± 0.78 Random – 6289 6876 ± 158 0 .14 ± 0.06 0 .73 ± 0.25 The ﬁrst two columns indicate the system and feature names (if any). The third column indicates the number N of songs in the withheld continuations involved in each experiment. MF and Neighbors, only evaluated for in-set songs, are displayed in italics. The median rank is relative to 14,552 unique songs. Lower is better. For MRR and R@100 higher is better. Systems clearly outperforming the best result of Hybrid MF (non-overlapping 95% CIs) are indicated in bold. MF or Neighbors clearly outperforming one another are indicated in italic bold could consider, and the results corresponding to MF and Neighbors are displayed in italics. A fair comparison of the hybrid systems and MF is provided in Section 8.4, where the performance of each system is shown as a function of how often the songs in the withheld continuations occurred in training playlists. 8.1 Interpreting the results Figure 6 displays the complete recall curve achieved by the playlist continuation sys- tems on the AotM-2011 dataset in the weak generalization setting (all the hybrid systems use the Logs features). To highlight that MF and Neighbors can only deal with in-set songs, their recall curves are represented with dashed lines. Proﬁles, Mem- bership, MF and Hybrid MF bend considerably to the upper left corner. This shows that they keep on predicting relevant songs as their recommendation lists grow. Neighbors starts similarly, but it quickly ﬂattens, not ﬁnding additional relevant recommendations as its recommendation list grows. However, if we look closer at the top 200 results (detail box in Fig. 6), we ﬁnd that Neighbors actually starts comparably well to MF, and even better than Proﬁles and Membership. Its quick decline is likely explained by the high sparsity of the datasets: half of the songs occur in one training playlist, and three quarters of the songs occur in no more than 2 training playlists (Table 1). Neighbors is only able to successfully predict recommendations for the most frequent songs, which co-occur often, but it is unable to do so for the vast majority of infrequent songs. Similarly, Popularity performs reasonably well for the top-most positions of the recommendation list, but its performance quickly degrades. The median rank (corresponding approximately to the dots at 50% recall in Fig. 6) summarizes the overall distribution of ranks attained by a system. The MRR and R@100 capture the performance at the top positions of the recommendation lists. 123

===== PAGE 24 =====
550 A. Vall et al. Fig. 6 Recall curve on the AotM-2011 playlist collection in weak generalization. The top 200 positions are detailed in the box. MF and Neighbors, only evaluated for in-set songs, are displayed with a dashed line (color ﬁgure online) Focusing on the overall performance of the systems, Proﬁles, Membership and MF are clearly preferable over Neighbors. Looking at the top positions only, Neighbors might appear preferable. It could be argued that only the top positions matter, because a user could not possibly look further than the top 10 recommendations. While this reasoning seems valid in on-line systems, where users react to the predicted recom- mendations, we believe that it is inaccurate in the context of off-line experiments. Assessing the usefulness of music recommendations is highly subjective. Given a playlist, there are multiple songs that a user could accept as relevant continuations. However, off-line experiments only accept exact matches to the withheld ground-truth continuation (McFee and Lanckriet 2011; Platt et al. 2002). For this reason, measuring the performance of a system focusing only on the top positions of recommendation lists can be misleading. Off-line experiments should be regarded as approximations of the ﬁnal system performance, and the performance should be measured by the sys- tem’s global merits. Throughout this section, we will mostly rely on the median rank as the metric to assess the global behavior of the playlist continuation systems. 8.2 Overall performance of the playlist continuation systems For now we only let the proposed systems use the Logs and Audio2CF features, which the Hybrid MF system can also utilize. This makes the comparison fair. 8.2.1 Weak generalization Proﬁles and Membership obtain lower (better) median rank than Hybrid MF using Logs and Audio2CF features, respectively (Tables 2, 3). Using Logs features, Proﬁles and Membership obtain higher (better) R@100 than Hybrid MF, but their MRR is comparable. Using Audio2CF features, the MRR and R@100 of Proﬁles, Membership and Hybrid MF are comparable in the AotM-2011 dataset, but Membership is clearly better than Proﬁles and Hybrid MF in the 8tracks dataset. 123

===== PAGE 25 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 551 For all the hybrid systems (Proﬁles, Membership and Hybrid MF) the Logs features yield better results than the Audio2CF features, regardless of the metric considered. The improvements are not equally pronounced in all the combinations of systems and datasets, but the gains are clear. This is expected because Audio2CF features are an approximation of Logs features derived from the audio signal of songs. Despite its remarkable results, the Audio2CF features can not bridge the music semantic g a p( C e l m ae ta l .2006; van den Oord et al. 2013). The performance of Proﬁles and Membership is comparable. Overall, Proﬁles can achieve a higher performance when using Logs features, but Membership is superior using Audio2CF features, especially in the 8tracks dataset. Finally, we comment on the performance of the pure CF baselines. MF obtains a clearly lower (better) median rank than Neighbors. On the other hand, Neighbors obtains MRR and R@100 comparable to MF. The reason for this apparent mismatch between median rank, MRR and R@100 was just exposed in Section 8.1. 8.2.2 Strong generalization Membership obtains a clearly lower (better) median rank than Hybrid MF, regard- less of the feature used (Tables 4, 5). Using Logs features, Membership and Hybrid MF obtain comparable MRR and R@100. Using Audio2CF features, the MRR and R@100 of Membership and Hybrid MF are comparable in the AotM-2011 dataset, but Membership is clearly better in the 8tracks dataset. For the hybrid systems, again the Logs features yield better results than the Audio2CF features. Indeed, the different information that these two features carry is independent of the generalization setting used to evaluate the systems. Compared to one another, the pure CF baselines behave similarly as in weak gener- alization. MF obtains lower (better) median rank than Neighbors. However, Neighbors obtains R@100 comparable to MF and MRR superior than MF, especially in the AotM- 2011 dataset. 8.2.3 Robustness to strong generalization We analyze the robustness of each system (but Proﬁles) to the strong generalization setting by comparing whether its performance degrades from Tables2 and 3 to Tables4 and 5. Membership performs comparably well in both generalization settings regardless of the feature utilized, the metric considered, and the dataset. This result indicates that regarding playlist-song pairs exclusively in terms of feature vectors (the key charac- teristic of Membership) does favor generalization and discourages the specialization towards particular training playlists. The performance of MF is also comparable in weak and strong generalization. This supports the approach detailed in Section 5.1.3, by which latent song factors derived from the factorization of a collection of training playlists can be successfully utilized to extend out-of-set playlists. We pointed out in Section 5.2 that Hybrid MF does not distinguish between in- set and out-of-set playlists. Now we observe that the performance of Hybrid MF is 123

===== PAGE 26 =====
552 A. Vall et al. identical in both generalization settings. Only the conﬁdence intervals are slightly different due to the randomness involved in bootstrap resampling. The performance of Neighbors is not harmed in strong generalization. In fact, it is slightly superior for the 8tracks dataset and superior for the AotM-2011 dataset. Popularity is also not affected when recommending out-of-set playlists. 8.3 Combined features Until now we only considered the proposed systems with Logs and Audio2CF features to make the comparison to Hybrid MF fair. However, Proﬁles and Membership can ﬂexibly exploit any type of song feature vector. In particular, they can utilize feature vectors resulting from the concatenation of other feature vectors. This simple approach already yields performance gains. To illustrate this effect, we now consider the Tags features as well. For each song, we create a combined feature by concatenating its Audio2CF, Tags and Logs feature vectors. Since each individual feature vector has 200 dimensions, the resulting feature vector is 600-dimensional. Proﬁles and Membership achieve clearly better results with the combined feature than with the Logs feature in terms of median rank and R@100, and modest but visible improvements in terms of MRR (Tables 2, 3, 4 , 5). We have just exposed an example of a combined feature vector to illustrate the capability of the proposed systems. Appendix B introduces additional feature types, and Appendix C provides an exhaustive evaluation of the results achieved using all the feature types and their combinations. 8.4 Infrequent and out-of-set songs We analyze the performance of the hybrid systems Proﬁles, Membership and Hybrid MF, as well as the performance of the purely collaborative system MF, as a function of how often the songs in the withheld continuations occurred in training playlists. We restrict the analysis to the weak generalization setting, but the results are comparable in the strong generalization setting. Figure7 reports the results. Proﬁles and Membership can use Audio2CF, Logs, or the combined feature described in Section8.3. Hybrid MF can only use Audio2CF and Logs features. For the sake of space, MF is represented together with Hybrid MF in the ﬁgure. The legend, which indicates the color associated to each feature, points to MF with a dummy feature called “None.” MF can not recommend out-of-set songs, and it achieves very low performance for songs that occurred in only one training playlist. This is expected because purely collaborative systems can not derive patterns in absence of sufﬁcient playlist-song co- occurrences. MF steadily improves its performance as songs become more frequent in training playlists, until it achieves a very competitive performance for songs occurring in 5+ training playlists. Hybrid MF with Logs features outperforms MF for very infrequent songs. Its per- formance improves as songs become more frequent, but it does not achieve the high performance of MF for frequent songs. Hybrid MF with Audio2CF features only outperforms MF for very infrequent songs, but MF quickly becomes better. 123

===== PAGE 27 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 553 (a) AotM-2011: weak generalization (b) 8tracks: weak generalization Fig. 7 Weak generalization results as a function of how often the songs in the withheld continuations occurred in training playlists. Left, center and right panels correspond to different systems. Upper and lower panels report the median rank (lower is better) and the R@100 (higher is better). The central values in the boxes correspond to the nominal metric value, and the ends correspond to the 95% CI. Each color corresponds to a feature type (MF is labeled as “None”). The text annotations on top indicate the number of songs in the withheld continuations falling in each box (color ﬁgure online) Proﬁles and Membership compete with Hybrid MF in terms of R@100, both using Logs and Audio2CF features. In terms of the median rank, Proﬁles and Membership compete with Hybrid MF using Audio2CF features, and they are generally superior using Logs features. Proﬁles and Membership further improve their performance using the combined feature, with which they perform reasonably well even for out-of-set 123

===== PAGE 28 =====
554 A. Vall et al. Table 6 Selection of weak generalization results in the AotM-2011 dataset for in-set songs only System Feature N Med rank MRR [%] R@100 [%] Proﬁles Audio2CF + Tags + Logs 2835 735 ± 76 2 .64 ± 0.50 17 .76 ± 1.53 Membership Audio2CF + Tags + Logs 2835 756 ± 73 2 .39 ± 0.45 18 .08 ± 1.54 CAGH – 2835 821 ± 89 1 .78 ± 0.36 15 .18 ± 1.41 Artists – 2835 1463 ± 140 0 .76 ± 0.20 8 .33 ± 1.13 The ﬁrst two columns indicate the system and feature names (if any). The third column indicates the number N of songs in the withheld continuations involved in each experiment. The median rank is relative to 12,286 unique songs. Lower is better. For MRR and R@100 higher is better and very infrequent songs. Using the combined features or Logs features, and despite some ﬂuctuations, the proposed systems improve their performance as songs become more frequent, with results competitive with those of MF for songs occurring in 5+ training playlists, especially in the 8tracks dataset. 8.5 Additional remarks on the sparsity of playlist collections The hybrid systems discussed throughout the paper mitigate the sparsity of the playlist collections by introducing inherent song relationships derived from content infor- mation. In this way, they provide performance improvements over systems based exclusively on the playlist collections. An alternative, compatible approach to reduce the sparsity of playlist collections consists in representing songs by their artists. Bon- nin and Jannach (2014) proposed the Collocated Artists Greatest Hits (CAGH) system, a song-neighbors CF system where the pairwise song similarities are replaced by the pairwise similarities of their artists, and the obtained playlist-song scores are further scaled by the frequency of the songs in the training playlists. We have experimented with CAGH, as well as with a variation of CAGH where the playlist-song scores are not scaled by the song frequency, which we name “Artists.” For comparison, we also evaluate Proﬁles and Membership for in-set songs only (Table 6). By design, CAGH is likely suffering from a bias towards popular songs that should be investigated in more detail. That is, the apparent outstanding performance of CAGH, even if only for in-set songs, may be the result of averaging accurate predictions for few but frequent songs, with poor predictions for many but infrequent songs (V all et al. 2017b, 2019). In any case, Artists should not be affected by such bias and also provides competitive results that seem to validate the assumption that songs can be successfully approxi- mated by their artists. This points to an interesting line for future work, namely the combination of hybridization and artist-level representations to reduce the sparsity in playlist collections. 9 Conclusion We have introduced Proﬁles and Membership, two feature-combination hybrid rec- ommender systems for automated music playlist continuation. The proposed systems 123

===== PAGE 29 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 555 extend collaborative ﬁltering by not only considering hand-curated playlists but also incorporating any type of song feature vector. We have designed feature-combination hybrids, that is, systems that consolidate collaborative and content information into enhanced, standalone systems. Even though we have focused on music playlist con- tinuation, the proposed systems are domain-agnostic and can be applied to other item domains. We have conducted an exhaustive off-line evaluation to assess the ability of the proposed systems to retrieve withheld playlist continuations, and to compare them to the state-of-the-art pure and hybrid collaborative systems MF and Hybrid MF. The results of the off-line experiments indicate that Proﬁles and Membership compete with MF when sufﬁcient training data is available and outperform MF for infrequent and out-of-set songs. Proﬁles and Membership compete to, or outperform Hybrid MF when using Logs or Audio2CF features. The ﬂexibility of the proposed systems to exploit any type of song feature vector provides a straightforward means of further improving their performance by simply combining different song feature vectors. We have also evaluated MF, Hybrid MF and Neighbors thoroughly. Hybrid MF outperforms MF only for very infrequent songs. Thus, if we were restricted to use MF and Hybrid MF, it would seem advisable to use Hybrid MF for infrequent songs (occurring in up to 3 training playlists in our experiments) and switch to MF for more frequent songs. It should be noted that the proposed systems, Proﬁles and Member- ship, take care of this switch automatically. We have also investigated why Neighbors obtains competitive MRR and R@100 metrics but very poor median rank, and we have discussed the interpretation of these metrics. We have observed the low predictive performance of Audio2CF features, derived exclusively from audio. While this can be explained by the music semantic gap, using Audio2CF features (or other purely audio-based features) as standalone features should be restricted to the recommendation of new releases, where the audio signal is the only song information available. Preliminary experiments point to building artist-level representations into hybrid recommender systems as a promising line of future work. Acknowledgements We thank Christine Bauer, Rainer Kelz, and Rocío del Río Lorenzo for their care- ful reading and valuable feedback during the preparation of this paper. Open access funding provided by Johannes Kepler University Linz. This research has received funding from the European Research Coun- cil (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 670035 (Con Espressione). Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Interna- tional License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. 123

===== PAGE 30 =====
556 A. Vall et al. A Additionalsystemdetails A.1 Profiles A.1.1 System conﬁguration We conducted an initial, non-exhaustive exploration of architectures on a validation set by evaluating networks with {2, 3, 4} hidden layers, {50, 100, 200, 500} hidden units, learning rate values in {0.1, 0.5, 1.0}, and batch sizes of {10, 50, 100, 200} songs. We also experimented with the hyperbolic tangent, the logistic function, and the rectiﬁer as activation functions for the hidden layers. Given the results of the initial exploration, we systematically explored all the com- binations of networks with {2, 3} hidden layers and with {50, 100, 200} hidden units. We decided to ﬁx the number of layers to 3 and the number of units to 100. We further ﬁxed the learning rate to 0.5, the batch size to 50 songs, and the hyperbolic tangent as the activation function for hidden layers. The output layer of the network is passed through logistic functions by design (Section 4.1.1). We used batch normalization (Ioffe et al. 2015). We also experimented with differ- ent dropout probabilities (Srivastava et al. 2014) and with L1 and L2 regularization to prevent overﬁtting. We ﬁnally decided to use dropout with probabilities 0.1 and 0.5 at the input layer and the hidden layers, respectively. The feature vectors were standardized and L2-normalized. The networks were optimized to minimize the cost function ( 1) using Ada- Grad (Duchi et al. 2011) with Nesterov momentum (Nesterov 1983). We trained for a maximum of 1000 epochs but stopped before if the value of the cost function on the validation set did not decrease for 50 epochs. The cost function drove the optimizer, but the best model was chosen on the basis of the highest recall achieved on the validation set. We also used the recall on the validation set to decide an appropriate number of epochs for the ﬁnal training on the entire training set. We implemented the networks using Lasagne (Dieleman et al. 2015), which is built on top of Theano (Team 2016). A.1.2 Computational requirements The instance of this system trained on the AotM-2011 dataset using Logs features has 323,144 learnable weights (almost 4 and 10 times fewer than Membership and MF, respectively). The system is trained with any variant of stochastic gradient descent (Bottou et al. 2018) using mini-batches. That is, even if a much larger playlist collection were considered, the system could still be trained efﬁciently in the same manner. Training the aforementioned system until it achieved the reported results required 666.07 s (roughly 11 min) on a desktop computer with an Intel Core i5-4570 CPU. The system required 4.46 s to make the predictions necessary for the weak gen- eralization evaluation. The implementation of this system was not optimized to obtain fast training and prediction times. 123

===== PAGE 31 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 557 Table 7 Membership architecture The input to the system are the features (Xp, xs) of a playlist-song pair ( p, s). Xtp denotes the tth row of the feature matrix Xp , i.e., the tth song of the playlist p. The upper part of the table corresponds to the feature transformation component t, and the lower part of the table corresponds to the match-discrimination component d. The boldface layers DEk, BNk in the transformation component t share their weights for all the songs in the playlist p and for song s (Section 4.2.1). The dimensionality of each layer is annotated in parentheses. DE: Dense layer, RE: Rectiﬁer activation function, BN: Batch Normalization (Ioffe et al. 2015) and DR: Dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014) A.2 Membership A.2.1 System conﬁguration We conducted an heuristic exploration of architectures and hyperparameters. We chose the architecture detailed in Table 7, which we found to provide good performance. We selected the hyperparameters that yielded lowest cost on the validation set. We used an initial learning rate of 0.001 and a batch size of 100 playlist-song pairs (50 matches and 50 mismatches). The features were not standardized nor normalized. The networks were optimized to minimize the cost function (2) using Adam (Kingma and Ba 2015). We trained for a maximum of 1000 epochs but stopped before if the value of the cost function on the validation set did not decrease for 25 epochs. We implemented the networks using Lasagne (Dieleman et al. 2015) and Theano (Team 2016). A.2.2 Computational requirements Membership is computationally more demanding than Proﬁles, meaning that we need to use a larger neural network to obtain competitive results. This is reasonable after all, because by not specializing towards the training playlists, Membership accomplishes a much more general task. The instance of this system trained on the AotM-2011 dataset using Logs features has 1,159,681 learnable weights (almost 3 times fewer than MF). The system is trained with any variant of stochastic gradient descent (Bottou 123

===== PAGE 32 =====
558 A. Vall et al. et al. 2018) using mini-batches. That is, even if a much larger playlist collection were considered, the system could still be trained efﬁciently in the same manner. Training the aforementioned system until it achieved the reported results required 3649.90 s (roughly 1 h) on a GeForce GTX 1080 Ti GPU. On the same GPU, the system required 1193.88 s (roughly 20 min) to make the predictions necessary for the weak generalization evaluation. The implementation of this system was not optimized to obtain fast training and prediction times. A.3 MF and Hybrid MF A.3.1 System conﬁguration We used the validation set to experiment with different values for the weight w 1 (Section 5.1.1). We found that using w1 = 2 yielded best results. MF and Hybrid MF use L2 regularization to prevent overﬁtting (Hu et al. 2008). We did not describe the regularization in Section 5.1.1 for simplicity, but the discussion and properties of ALS remain valid. We decided to use a weight of 10 for the L2 regularization term based on experiments on the validation set. A.3.2 Computational requirements The instance of MF trained on the AotM-2011 dataset has 2,999,400 learnable weights. The system is trained efﬁciently with ALS. Training MF until it achieved the reported results required 190.08 s (roughly 3 min) on a desktop computer with an Intel Core i5-4570 CPU. MF required 0.22 s to make the predictions necessary for the weak generalization evaluation. Hybrid MF required 2.48 s to complete the weak general- ization evaluation, including the ALS update and the predictions. We used the publicly available implementation of MF provided by Frederickson ( 2018), which is highly optimized to obtain fast training times. The predictions, which simply consist in the multiplication of low rank matrices, are very fast. A.4 Neighbors This system does not require adjusting any hyperparameters or learning any weights. The weak evaluation of Neighbors on the AotM-2011 dataset using a desktop com- puter with an Intel Core i5-4570 CPU required 0.81 s to compute the pairwise playlist similarities given by Eq. ( 7) and 1.38 s to compute the playlist-song scores given by Eq. ( 8). Given the moderate size of the considered AotM-2011 and 8tracks playlist collections, both operations could be implemented as fast matrix multipli- cations. 123

===== PAGE 33 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 559 B Additionalsongfeatures B.1 Semantic features from audio signal (“Audio2Tag”) The on-line music service Jamendo16 hosts songs under Creative Commons17 licenses and allows free downloads. We obtain a dump of the Jamendo database, that includes, among other types of information, the social tags assigned to songs hosted in Jamendo. Then, we use the code released by Sonnleitner and Widmer (2016) to collect the audio ﬁles corresponding to the database dump. This results in a collection of roughly 200k songs independent of the playlists collections and the MSD, for which both a full- length audio ﬁle and a list of social tags is known. We build an auto-tagger system based on a convolutional neural network. The network takes a song spectrogram as input, processes it, and predicts the probability of this song being labeled with each of a series of known tags. We train this network using the audio ﬁles and the social tags from the Jamendo database. We use only the tags that have been assigned to at least 1000 songs, resulting in 156 unique tags and 187,663 songs. The tagging network is similar to the Audio2CF feature extractor (Section 7.2.2). It is inspired by the VGG-style architecture (Simonyan et al. 2014) and consists of sequences of 3 × 3 convolution stacks followed by 2 × 2 max pooling. To reduce the dimensionality of the network output to the predeﬁned number of tags, we insert, as a ﬁnal building block, a 1 × 1 convolution having 156 feature maps followed by global average pooling (Lin et al. 2013). Each output neuron, which corresponds to one of the tags, is followed by a logistic activation function to obtain a valid tag probability. However, we use the 156-dimensional output layer before it is passed through the activation function as the Audio2Tag feature. We use the trained auto-tagger to predict Audio2Tag features for the songs in the playlist collections, given audio snippets downloaded from 7digital. This approach is related to the systems presented by Liang et al. ( 2015) and Choi et al. (2016). B.2 I-vectors from timbral features I-vectors were ﬁrst introduced in the ﬁeld of speaker veriﬁcation (Dehak et al. 2011), but recently they have also been successfully utilized for music similarity and music artist recognition tasks (Eghbal-zadeh et al. 2015a, b). The MSD splits songs into segments of variable length (typically under a sec- ond) and provides 12-dimensional timbral coefﬁcients for each segment similar to MFCCs (Rabiner and Juang 1993). We build a Gaussian mixture model with 1024 components using the segment-level timbral features of a collection of representative songs [more details can be found in our previous works (V all et al. 2017a, 2018a)]. Using the unique songs in the playlists, we derive the total variability space yielding 200-dimensional i-vectors. Following the standard i-vector extraction pipeline, we fur- 16 https://www.jamendo.com 17 https://creativecommons.org 123

===== PAGE 34 =====
560 A. Vall et al. ther transform the obtained i-vectors using a linear discriminant analysis model (Hastie et al. 2008) ﬁt on the training playlists. C Additionalresults We provide additional results to demonstrate the performance of Proﬁles and Mem- bership with different types of song features, and with stepwise combinations of two or three types of song features. Tables 8 and 9 report weak generalization results for the AotM-2011 and the 8tracks datasets, respectively. Tables 10 and 11 report strong generalization results for the AotM-2011 and the 8tracks datasets, respec- tively. We also analyze the performance of Proﬁles, Membership and Hybrid MF sim- ulating the recommendation of new song releases. To this end, we pretend that the audio signal is the only type of song description available, and we only consider songs that occurred in 4 or less training playlists. Tables 12 and 13 report the results for the AotM-2011 and the 8tracks datasets, respectively. Besides the median rank, the MRR and the R@100, Tables 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 also report the Mean Average Precision (MAP), the R@10 and the R@30. 123

===== PAGE 35 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 561Table 8 Weak generalization results for the AotM-2011 dataset System Feature N Med rank MRR [%] MAP [%] R@10 [%] R@30 [%] R@100 [%] Proﬁles Audio2CF + Tags + Logs 4473 891 ± 63 2 .49 ± 0.41 1 .75 ± 0.28 3 .47 ± 0.61 7 .21 ± 0.85 15 .91 ± 1.23 Tags + Logs 4473 947 ± 74 2.01 ± 0.33 1 .42 ± 0.22 2 .82 ± 0.55 6.59 ± 0.84 14 .81 ± 1.17 Audio2CF + Logs 4473 1010 ± 86 1.98 ± 0.33 1 .44 ± 0.27 2 .57 ± 0.54 6.17 ± 0.80 14 .29 ± 1.16 Logs 4473 1091 ± 90 1.91 ± 0.33 1 .31 ± 0.24 2 .33 ± 0.49 5.75 ± 0.74 13 .34 ± 1.12 Audio2CF + Tags 4473 1340 ± 95 1.65 ± 0.31 1 .22 ± 0.24 2 .32 ± 0.52 5 .23 ± 0.77 12.15 ± 1.08 Tags 4473 1453 ± 114 1.45 ± 0.26 1 .05 ± 0.20 1 .84 ± 0.44 5.80 ± 0.80 11 .78 ± 1.05 Audio2CF 4473 2298 ± 127 0 .75 ± 0.20 0 .54 ± 0.14 0 .80 ± 0.31 2 .38 ± 0.52 6 .68 ± 0.83 I-vectors 4473 2820 ± 167 0 .59 ± 0.17 0 .41 ± 0.13 0 .60 ± 0.25 1 .45 ± 0.40 4 .45 ± 0.71 Audio2Tag 4473 3315 ± 172 0 .31 ± 0.08 0 .23 ± 0.06 0 .25 ± 0.18 0 .98 ± 0.33 3 .14 ± 0.57 Membership Audio2CF + Tags + Logs 4473 1052 ± 73 2 .18 ± 0.37 1 .52 ± 0.26 2 .95 ± 0.58 6 .45 ± 0.81 14 .88 ± 1.16 Audio2CF + Logs 4473 1144 ± 78 1.97 ± 0.34 1 .35 ± 0.24 2 .34 ± 0.50 5 .43 ± 0.73 12.88 ± 1.09 Tags + Logs 4473 1145 ± 94 2 .20 ± 0.37 1 .54 ± 0.28 2.68 ± 0.52 6.09 ± 0.78 14 .11 ± 1.15 Tags 4473 1201 ± 104 1.62 ± 0.29 1 .16 ± 0.20 2 .08 ± 0.48 4 .92 ± 0.71 12.55 ± 1.08 Audio2CF + Tags 4473 1243 ± 94 1.53 ± 0.26 1 .12 ± 0.20 2 .08 ± 0.48 5.70 ± 0.78 12 .76 ± 1.09 123

===== PAGE 36 =====
562 A. Vall et al. Table 8 continued System Feature N Med rank MRR [%] MAP [%] R@10 [%] R@30 [%] R@100 [%] Logs 4473 1391 ± 101 1.71 ± 0.34 1 .15 ± 0.22 2 .16 ± 0.47 4 .56 ± 0.69 11.25 ± 1.01 Audio2CF 4473 2042 ± 113 1.08 ± 0.25 0 .77 ± 0.19 1 .28 ± 0.37 2 .96 ± 0.58 7 .56 ± 0.88 I-vectors 4473 2632 ± 179 1 .01 ± 0.22 0 .72 ± 0.16 1 .32 ± 0.37 3 .26 ± 0.57 8 .13 ± 0.88 Audio2Tag 4473 2887 ± 163 0 .57 ± 0.18 0 .40 ± 0.12 0 .69 ± 0.29 1 .66 ± 0.44 4 .48 ± 0.70 MF – 2835 1572 ± 150 2.21 ± 0.45 1.73 ± 0.37 3.49 ± 0.74 6.83 ± 1.01 13.5 ± 1.36 Hybrid MF Logs 4473 2404 ± 164 1 .47 ± 0.32 1 .03 ± 0.22 1 .90 ± 0.47 4 .12 ± 0.66 8 .86 ± 0.92 Audio2CF 4473 2921 ± 164 0 .74 ± 0.21 0 .54 ± 0.15 0 .91 ± 0.33 2 .33 ± 0.52 5 .60 ± 0.77 Neighbors – 2835 5112 ± 321 2.66 ± 0.55 2.04 ± 0.43 4.02 ± 0.79 6.88 ± 1.04 11.84 ± 1.28 Popularity – 4473 5217 ± 570 1 .03 ± 0.27 0 .67 ± 0.17 1 .17 ± 0.36 3 .01 ± 0.57 6 .34 ± 0.80 Random – 4473 6163 ± 218 0 .10 ± 0.03 0 .07 ± 0.02 0 .09 ± 0.13 0 .24 ± 0.18 0 .98 ± 0.34 The ﬁrst two columns indicate the system and feature names (if any). The third column indicates the number N of songs in the withheld continuations involved in each experiment. MF and Neighbors, only evaluated for in-set songs, are displayed in italics. The median rank is relative to 12,286 unique songs. Lower is b etter. For MRR, MAP and R@{10, 30, 100} higher is better. Systems clearly outperforming Hybrid MF (non-overlapping 95% CIs) are indicated in bold. MF or Neighbors clearl y outperforming one another are indicated in italic bold 123

===== PAGE 37 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 563Table 9 Weak generalization results for the 8tracks dataset System Feature N Med rank MRR [%] MAP [%] R@10 [%] R@30 [%] R@100 [%] Proﬁles Audio2CF + Tags + Logs 6289 556 ± 38 3 .90 ± 0.43 2 .46 ± 0.27 4 .79 ± 0.62 11 .46 ± 0.89 23 .51 ± 1.21 Tags + Logs 6289 587 ± 42 3 .85 ± 0.45 2 .48 ± 0.29 4 .84 ± 0.61 10 .65 ± 0.88 22 .37 ± 1.20 Audio2CF + Logs 6289 659 ± 45 3.40 ± 0.41 2 .17 ± 0.26 4 .09 ± 0.56 9.42 ± 0.83 20 .62 ± 1.15 Logs 6289 718 ± 58 3 .62 ± 0.44⋆ 2.31 ± 0.28 4 .30 ± 0.58 9 .92 ± 0.83 20 .03 ± 1.12 Audio2CF + Tags 6289 965 ± 61 2.84 ± 0.40 1 .76 ± 0.25 3 .22 ± 0.49 7 .28 ± 0.75 15 .74 ± 1.03 Tags 6289 1084 ± 65 2.54 ± 0.36 1 .63 ± 0.25 2 .86 ± 0.47 6 .55 ± 0.71 14 .64 ± 0.98 Audio2CF 6289 1988 ± 90 1 .13 ± 0.24 0 .69 ± 0.13 0 .99 ± 0.29 2 .75 ± 0.47 8 .21 ± 0.80 I-vectors 6289 2164 ± 114 1 .34 ± 0.25 0 .73 ± 0.12 1 .32 ± 0.31 3 .02 ± 0.46 7 .10 ± 0.70 Audio2Tag 6289 2946 ± 138 0 .57 ± 0.15 0 .35 ± 0.09 0 .45 ± 0.18 1 .26 ± 0.32 4 .13 ± 0.56 Membership Audio2CF + Tags + Logs 6289 652 ± 46 3 .73 ± 0.44 2 .35 ± 0.28 4 .52 ± 0.60 9 .58 ± 0.83 20 .43 ± 1.12 Audio2CF + Logs 6289 691 ± 49 3.33 ± 0.38 2 .16 ± 0.25 4 .20 ± 0.56 9.55 ± 0.83 20 .05 ± 1.09 Tags + Logs 6289 719 ± 53 3.47 ± 0.40 2 .18 ± 0.26 4.68 ± 0.58 9 .45 ± 0.80 19 .59 ± 1.12 Audio2CF + Tags 6289 762 ± 59 3.56 ± 0.43 2 .19 ± 0.27 4 .18 ± 0.56 9.42 ± 0.84 19 .58 ± 1.08 Tags 6289 804 ± 54 3.31 ± 0.40 2 .05 ± 0.25 4 .09 ± 0.56 8 .88 ± 0.79 18.53 ± 1.10 Logs 6289 986 ± 68 2.89 ± 0.37 1 .78 ± 0.22 3 .79 ± 0.52 8 .00 ± 0.75 16 .92 ± 1.04 123

===== PAGE 38 =====
564 A. Vall et al. Table 9 continued System Feature N Med rank MRR [%] MAP [%] R@10 [%] R@30 [%] R@100 [%] Audio2CF 6289 1149 ± 69 2.49 ± 0.35 1 .47 ± 0.20 2 .71 ± 0.46 6 .44 ± 0.67 15 .50 ± 1.02 I-vectors 6289 1441 ± 86 2.23 ± 0.34 1 .31 ± 0.19 2 .31 ± 0.41 5 .72 ± 0.61 12 .76 ± 0.92 Audio2Tag 6289 1841 ± 87 2 .23 ± 0.36 1 .33 ± 0.22 2 .43 ± 0.42 5 .63 ± 0.63 11 .52 ± 0.88 MF – 4299 1198 ± 145 4.04 ± 0.56 2.77 ± 0.42 5.27 ± 0.72 10.38 ± 1.01 18.62 ± 1.29 Hybrid MF Logs 6289 1677 ± 138 2 .79 ± 0.41 1 .74 ± 0.25 3 .19 ± 0.50 7 .39 ± 0.75 15 .88 ± 1.05 Audio2CF 6289 2636 ± 142 1 .09 ± 0.24 0 .73 ± 0.18 1 .06 ± 0.30 2 .58 ± 0.46 7 .03 ± 0.75 Neighbors – 4299 3566 ± 318 4.93 ± 0.64 3.49 ± 0.48 6.94 ± 0.86 12.11 ± 1.08 19.50 ± 1.32 Popularity – 6289 3352 ± 272 1 .80 ± 0.33 1 .05 ± 0.19 1 .79 ± 0.36 4 .14 ± 0.53 9 .71 ± 0.81 Random – 6289 7094 ± 234 0 .15 ± 0.06 0 .11 ± 0.06 0 .15 ± 0.13 0 .31 ± 0.17 0 .78 ± 0.24 The ﬁrst two columns indicate the system and feature names (if any). The third column indicates the number N of songs in the withheld continuations involved in each experiment. MF and Neighbors, only evaluated for in-set songs, are displayed in italics. The median rank is relative to 14,552 unique songs. Lower is b etter. For MRR, MAP and R@{10, 30, 100} higher is better. Systems clearly outperforming Hybrid MF (non-overlapping 95% CIs) are indicated in bold. MF or Neighbors clearl y outperforming one another are indicated in italic bold ⋆ The 95% bootstrap CIs for the MRR of Proﬁles (Logs) and Hybrid MF (Logs) do not overlap. However, this is not apparent from the table because, for readabi lity, we only display the largest margin of the CIs 123

===== PAGE 39 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 565 Table 10 Strong generalization results for the AotM-2011 dataset System Feature N Med rank MRR [%] MAP [%] R@10 [%] R@30 [%] R@100 [%] Proﬁles – – – – – – – – Membership Audio2CF + Tags + Logs 4473 1150 ± 72 1.88 ± 0.33 1 .37 ± 0.25 2 .53 ± 0.51 5.91 ± 0.78 13 .69 ± 1.13 Tags + Logs 4473 1223 ± 77 1.82 ± 0.33 1 .23 ± 0.21 2 .20 ± 0.48 5.66 ± 0.74 13 .50 ± 1.13 Audio2CF + Logs 4473 1248 ± 95 1.86 ± 0.33 1 .25 ± 0.23 2 .31 ± 0.48 5 .41 ± 0.75 12.64 ± 1.08 Audio2CF + Tags 4473 1285 ± 89 1.73 ± 0.31 1 .26 ± 0.23 2 .57 ± 0.55 5 .42 ± 0.77 12.54 ± 1.10 Tags 4473 1423 ± 106 1.79 ± 0.35 1 .27 ± 0.26 1 .97 ± 0.46 4 .95 ± 0.73 12.33 ± 1.07 Logs 4473 1552 ± 96 1.42 ± 0.29 0 .98 ± 0.20 1 .88 ± 0.47 4 .18 ± 0.64 10 .71 ± 1.04 Audio2CF 4473 2065 ± 120 0.93 ± 0.21 0 .62 ± 0.12 1 .40 ± 0.39 3 .18 ± 0.58 7 .05 ± 0.85 I-vectors 4473 2768 ± 185 0 .93 ± 0.20 0 .63 ± 0.15 1 .11 ± 0.35 2 .99 ± 0.58 7 .45 ± 0.85 Audio2Tag 4473 2900 ± 151 0 .51 ± 0.14 0 .35 ± 0.09 0 .57 ± 0.26 1 .29 ± 0.37 4 .00 ± 0.64 MF – 2849 1428 ± 135 2.72 ± 0.53 2.12 ± 0.42 4.03 ± 0.81 8.41 ± 1.10 15.43 ± 1.44 Hybrid MF Logs 4473 2404 ± 164 1 .47 ± 0.31 1 .03 ± 0.23 1 .90 ± 0.47 4 .12 ± 0.67 8 .86 ± 0.94 Audio2CF 4473 2921 ± 164 0 .74 ± 0.21 0 .54 ± 0.14 0 .91 ± 0.33 2 .33 ± 0.52 5 .60 ± 0.78 Neighbors – 2849 4502 ± 304 4.89 ± 0.82 4.26 ± 0.73 6.54 ± 1.03 10.31 ± 1.24 15.16 ± 1.43 Popularity – 4473 5143 ± 583 1 .03 ± 0.27 0 .67 ± 0.17 1 .09 ± 0.34 3 .07 ± 0.57 7 .28 ± 0.85 Random – 4473 6161 ± 188 0 .13 ± 0.05 0 .10 ± 0.05 0 .13 ± 0.15 0 .35 ± 0.22 1 .23 ± 0.37 The ﬁrst two columns indicate the system and feature names (if any). The third column indicates the number N of songs in the withheld continuations involved in each experiment. MF and Neighbors, only evaluated for in-set songs, are displayed in italics. The median rank is relative to 12,286 unique songs. Lower is b etter. For MRR, MAP and R@{10, 30, 100} higher is better. Systems clearly outperforming Hybrid MF (non-overlapping 95% CIs) are indicated in bold. MF or Neighbors clearl y outperforming one another are indicated in italic bold 123

===== PAGE 40 =====
566 A. Vall et al. Table 11 Strong generalization results for the 8tracks dataset System Feature N Med rank MRR [%] MAP [%] R@10 [%] R@30 [%] R@100 [%] Proﬁles – – – – – – – – Membership Audio2CF + Tags + Logs 6289 710 ± 51 3.46 ± 0.43 2 .19 ± 0.27 4.31 ± 0.58 9 .77 ± 0.84 20 .40 ± 1.12 Audio2CF + Logs 6289 773 ± 52 3.28 ± 0.42 2 .04 ± 0.27 3 .57 ± 0.52 8 .68 ± 0.78 18.38 ± 1.07 Tags + Logs 6289 792 ± 51 3.41 ± 0.44 2 .10 ± 0.26 3 .69 ± 0.53 8 .83 ± 0.80 18.90 ± 1.11 Audio2CF + Tags 6289 849 ± 52 3.23 ± 0.39 2 .04 ± 0.25 4 .17 ± 0.57 8 .58 ± 0.78 18.94 ± 1.12 Tags 6289 869 ± 73 3.31 ± 0.42 1 .99 ± 0.25 3 .87 ± 0.53 7 .93 ± 0.76 17 .76 ± 1.05 Logs 6289 1038 ± 78 2.85 ± 0.39 1 .70 ± 0.22 3 .10 ± 0.47 7 .36 ± 0.71 15 .90 ± 1.03 Audio2CF 6289 1317 ± 86 2.58 ± 0.37 1 .52 ± 0.22 2 .72 ± 0.44 5 .96 ± 0.64 14 .54 ± 0.99 I-vectors 6289 1455 ± 91⋆ 2.01 ± 0.29 1 .22 ± 0.18 2 .32 ± 0.40 5 .71 ± 0.64 12 .83 ± 0.94 Audio2Tag 6289 2093 ± 125 1 .91 ± 0.31 1 .11 ± 0.19 2 .15 ± 0.38 4 .61 ± 0.57 9 .68 ± 0.81 MF – 4298 997.5 ± 109.5 4.48 ± 0.61 3.06 ± 0.42 5.41 ± 0.75 11.02 ± 1.05 20 .32 ± 1.35 Hybrid MF Logs 6289 1677 ± 138 2 .79 ± 0.41 1 .74 ± 0.26 3 .19 ± 0.50 7 .39 ± 0.73 15.88 ± 1.04 Audio2CF 6289 2636 ± 142 1 .09 ± 0.24 0 .73 ± 0.18 1 .06 ± 0.30 2 .58 ± 0.47 7 .03 ± 0.75 Neighbors – 4298 3045.5 ± 390.5 5.27 ± 0.68 3.87 ± 0.54 7.11 ± 0.85 12.76 ± 1.14 20.43 ± 1.41 Popularity – 6289 3293 ± 278 1 .76 ± 0.32 1 .04 ± 0.20 1 .75 ± 0.36 4 .49 ± 0.55 9 .32 ± 0.78 Random – 6289 6876 ± 158 0 .14 ± 0.06 0 .10 ± 0.05 0 .15 ± 0.13 0 .21 ± 0.14 0 .73 ± 0.25 The ﬁrst two columns indicate the system and feature names (if any). The third column indicates the number N of songs in the withheld continuations involved in each experiment. MF and Neighbors, only evaluated for in-set songs, are displayed in italics. The median rank is relative to 14,552 unique songs. Lower is b etter. For MRR, MAP and R@{10, 30, 100} higher is better. Systems clearly outperforming Hybrid MF (non-overlapping 95% CIs) are indicated in bold. MF or Neighbors clearl y outperforming one another are indicated in italic bold ⋆ The 95% bootstrap CIs for the median rank of Membership (i-vectors) and Hybrid MF (Logs) do not overlap. However, this is not apparent from the table bec ause, for readability, we only display the largest margin of the CIs 123

===== PAGE 41 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 567 Table 12 Results on the AotM-2011 dataset recommending songs that occurred in 4 or less training playlists using only features derived from the audio signal Generalization System Feature N Med rank MRR [%] MAP [%] R@10 [%] R@30 [%] R@100 [%] Weak Proﬁles Audio2CF 3411 2130 ± 140 0.58 ± 0.16 0 .46 ± 0.13 0 .61 ± 0.30 2 .23 ± 0.55 6 .65 ± 0.94 I-vectors 3411 2738 ± 177 0 .49 ± 0.15 0 .35 ± 0.10 0 .57 ± 0.29 1 .33 ± 0.43 4 .06 ± 0.73 Audio2Tag 3411 3141 ± 189 0 .32 ± 0.08 0 .25 ± 0.07 0 .29 ± 0.20 1 .07 ± 0.40 3 .53 ± 0.68 Membership Audio2CF 3411 2264 ± 135 0.55 ± 0.17 0 .46 ± 0.16 0 .68 ± 0.33 1 .75 ± 0.50 5 .33 ± 0.84 Audio2Tag 3411 3106 ± 174 0 .26 ± 0.05 0 .21 ± 0.04 0 .28 ± 0.22 0 .96 ± 0.39 3 .36 ± 0.69 I-vectors 3411 3514 ± 154 0 .10 ± 0.01 0 .09 ± 0.01 0 .00 ± 0.00 0 .06 ± 0.10 0 .75 ± 0.34 Hybrid MF Audio2CF 3411 2718 ± 205 0 .75 ± 0.22 0 .62 ± 0.19 1 .10 ± 0.40 2 .74 ± 0.63 6 .12 ± 0.92 Random – 3411 6108 ± 224 0 .10 ± 0.03 0 .08 ± 0.03 0 .13 ± 0.17 0 .30 ± 0.24 1 .10 ± 0.41 Strong Proﬁles – – – – – – – – Membership Audio2CF 3456 2257 ± 134.5 0.43 ± 0.08 0 .35 ± 0.07 0 .68 ± 0.33 1 .90 ± 0.52 5 .20 ± 0.83 Audio2Tag 3456 3029 ± 218 0 .25 ± 0.07 0 .19 ± 0.04 0 .21 ± 0.17 0 .53 ± 0.25 2 .82 ± 0.62 I-vectors 3456 3578 .5 ± 194.50 .11 ± 0.01 0 .09 ± 0.01 0 .00 ± 0.00 0 .08 ± 0.11 0 .80 ± 0.34 Hybrid MF Audio2CF 3456 2705 ± 202 0 .75 ± 0.21 0 .63 ± 0.20 1 .11 ± 0.41 2 .74 ± 0.63 6 .12 ± 0.92 Random – 3456 6118 ± 214 0 .12 ± 0.05 0 .10 ± 0.05 0 .15 ± 0.17 0 .43 ± 0.26 1 .23 ± 0.42 The ﬁrst three columns indicate the generalization setting, the system name, and the feature name (if any). The fourth column indicates the number N of songs in the withheld continuations involved in each experiment. The median rank is relative to 12,286 unique songs. Lower is better. For MRR, MAP and R@{10, 30, 100} higher is better. Systems clearly outperforming Hybrid MF (non-overlapping 95% CIs) are indicated in bold 123

===== PAGE 42 =====
568 A. Vall et al. Table 13 Results on the 8tracks dataset recommending songs that occurred in 4 or less training playlists using only features derived from the audio signal Generalization System Feature N Med rank MRR [%] MAP [%] R@10 [%] R@30 [%] R@100 [%] Weak Proﬁles Audio2CF 4088 1778 ± 152 0.99 ± 0.22 0 .71 ± 0.17 1 .13 ± 0.36 2 .94 ± 0.58 8 .79 ± 1.01 I-vectors 4088 2279 .5 ± 145.50 .71 ± 0.17 0 .48 ± 0.10 0 .86 ± 0.32 2 .14 ± 0.50 5 .48 ± 0.77 Audio2Tag 4088 2727 ± 156.50 .56 ± 0.17 0 .38 ± 0.11 0 .51 ± 0.23 1 .48 ± 0.41 4 .62 ± 0.72 Membership Audio2CF 4088 1922 ± 118 0 .57 ± 0.15 0 .43 ± 0.09 0 .59 ± 0.27 1 .96 ± 0.49 6 .60 ± 0.89 I-vectors 4088 2596 .5 ± 119 0 .32 ± 0.12 0 .23 ± 0.07 0 .20 ± 0.16 0 .66 ± 0.27 2 .35 ± 0.51 Audio2Tag 4088 2779 .5 ± 155.50 .26 ± 0.04 0 .21 ± 0.03 0 .17 ± 0.13 0 .93 ± 0.33 3 .31 ± 0.64 Hybrid MF Audio2CF 4088 2180 ± 187 1 .15 ± 0.28 0 .84 ± 0.21 1 .33 ± 0.40 3 .03 ± 0.61 8 .09 ± 0.94 Random – 4088 7168 ± 256 0 .10 ± 0.04 0 .07 ± 0.03 0 .10 ± 0.12 0 .20 ± 0.15 0 .70 ± 0.27 Strong Proﬁles – – – – – – – – Membership Audio2CF 4134 2002 ± 136 0 .58 ± 0.15 0 .43 ± 0.11 0 .51 ± 0.23 1 .55 ± 0.43 6 .03 ± 0.85 I-vectors 4134 2522 .5 ± 123 0 .23 ± 0.05 0 .17 ± 0.02 0 .05 ± 0.06 0 .55 ± 0.24 2 .11 ± 0.50 Audio2Tag 4134 2747 .5 ± 152.50 .35 ± 0.11 0 .25 ± 0.06 0 .30 ± 0.18 0 .83 ± 0.32 3 .59 ± 0.64 Hybrid MF Audio2CF 4134 2202 .5 ± 190 1 .16 ± 0.29 0 .84 ± 0.21 1 .35 ± 0.41 3 .03 ± 0.60 8 .11 ± 0.96 Random – 4134 6921 .5 ± 220.50 .08 ± 0.03 0 .06 ± 0.02 0 .02 ± 0.04 0 .05 ± 0.06 0 .61 ± 0.27 The ﬁrst three columns indicate the generalization setting, the system name, and the feature name (if any). The fourth column indicates the number N of songs in the withheld continuations involved in each experiment. The median rank is relative to 14,552 unique songs. Lower is better. For MRR, MAP and R@{10, 30, 100} higher is better. Systems clearly outperforming Hybrid MF (non-overlapping 95% CIs) are indicated in bold 123

===== PAGE 43 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 569 References Adomavicius, G., Tuzhilin, A.: Toward the next generation of recommender systems: a survey of the state- of-the-art and possible extensions. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 17(6), 734–749 (2005) Aizenberg, N., Koren, Y ., Somekh, O.: Build your own music recommender by modeling internet radio streams. In: Proceedings of WWW, Lyon, France, pp. 1–10 (2012) Bertin-Mahieux, T., Ellis, D.P ., Whitman, B., Lamere, P .: The million song dataset. In: Proceedings of ISMIR, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA, pp. 591–596 (2011) Blei, D.M., Ng, A.Y ., Jordan, M.I.: Latent dirichlet allocation. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 3, 993–1022 (2003) Bonnin, G., Jannach, D.: Automated generation of music playlists: Survey and experiments. ACM Comput. Surv. 47(2), 1–35 (2014) Bottou, L., Curtis, F.E., Nocedal, J.: Optimization methods for large-scale machine learning (2018). arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04838 Burke, R.: Hybrid recommender systems: Survey and experiments. User Model. User Adapt. Interact.12(4), 331–370 (2002) Celma, O.: Music Recommendation and Discovery. Springer, Berlin (2010) Celma, O., Herrera, P ., Serra, X.: Bridging the music semantic gap. In: Proceedings of ESWC Workshop on Mastering the Gap: From Information Extraction to Semantic Representation, Budva, Montenegro (2006) Chen, S., Moore, J.L., Turnbull, D., Joachims, T.: Playlist prediction via metric embedding. In: Proceedings of SIGKDD, Beijing, China, pp. 714–722 (2012) Chen, C.M., Tsai, M.F., Lin, Y .C., Y ang, Y .H.: Query-based music recommendations via preference embed- ding. In: Proceedings of RecSys, Boston, MA, USA, pp. 79–82 (2016) Choi, K., Fazekas, G., Sandler, M.: Automatic tagging using deep convolutional neural networks. In: Pro- ceedings of ISMIR, New Y ork, NY , USA (2016) Cunningham, S.J., Bainbridge, D., Falconer, A: “More of an art than a science”: Supporting the creation of playlists and mixes. In: Proceedings of ISMIR, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada (2006) Dehak, N., Kenny, P .J., Dehak, R., Dumouchel, P ., Ouellet, P .: Front-end factor analysis for speaker veriﬁ- cation. IEEE Trans. Audio Speech Lang. Process. 19(4), 788–798 (2011) DiCiccio, T.J., Efron, B.: Bootstrap conﬁdence intervals. Stat. Sci. 11, 189–212 (1996) Dieleman, S., Schlüter, J., Raffel, C., Olson, E., Sønderby, S.K., Nouri, D., Maturana, D., Thoma, M., Battenberg, E., Kelly, J., Fauw, J.D., Heilman, M., Almeida, D.M.D., McFee, B., Weideman, H., Takács, G., Rivaz, P .D., Crall, J., Sanders, G., Rasul, K., Liu, C., French, G., Degrave, J.: Lasagne: ﬁrst release (2015). https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.27878 Duchi, J., Hazan, E., Singer, Y .: Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning and stochastic optimiza- tion. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12, 2121–2159 (2011) Eghbal-zadeh, H., Lehner, B., Schedl, M., Widmer, G.: I-vectors for timbre-based music similarity and music artist classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings of ISMIR, Málaga, Spain, pp. 554–560 (2015a) Eghbal-zadeh, H., Schedl, M., Widmer, G.: Timbral modeling for music artist recognition using i-vectors. In: Proceedings of EUSIPCO, Nice, France, pp. 1286–1290 (2015b) Flexer, A., Schnitzer, D., Gasser, M., Widmer, G.: Playlist generation using start and end songs. In: Pro- ceedings of ISMIR, Philadelphia, PA, USA, pp. 173–178 (2008) Frederickson, B.: Fast python collaborative ﬁltering for implicit feedback datasets. Original-date: 2016-04- 17T03:45:23Z (2018). https://github.com/benfred/implicit . Accessed 12 Dec 2018 Hariri, N., Mobasher, B., Burke, R.: Context-aware music recommendation based on latent topic sequential patterns. In: Proceedings of RecSys, Dublin, Ireland, pp. 131–138 (2012) Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Friedman, J.: The Elements of Statistical Learning. Springer Series in Statistics. Springer, Berlin (2008) Hu, Y ., Koren, Y ., V olinsky, C.: Collaborative ﬁltering for implicit feedback datasets. In: Proceedings of ICDM, Pisa, Italy, pp. 263–272 (2008) Ioffe, S., Szegedy, C.: Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing internal covari- ate shift (2015). arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.03167 Jannach, D., Ludewig, M.: When recurrent neural networks meet the neighborhood for session-based recommendation. In: Proceedings of RecSys, Como, Italy, pp. 306–310 (2017) Jannach, D., Lerche, L., Kamehkhosh, I.: Beyond “hitting the hits”: Generating coherent music playlist continuations with the right tracks. In: Proceedings of RecSys, Vienna, Austria, pp. 187–194 (2015) 123

===== PAGE 44 =====
570 A. Vall et al. Kingma, D.P ., Ba, J.: Adam: a method for stochastic optimization. In: Proceedings of ICLR, San Diego, CA, USA (2015) Knees, P ., Pohle, T., Schedl, M., Widmer, G.: Combining audio-based similarity with web-based data to accelerate automatic music playlist generation. In: Proceedings of International Workshop on Multi- media IR, Santa Barbara, CA USA, pp. 147–154 (2006) Krause, A.E., North, A.C.: Contextualized music listening: Playlists and the Mehrabian and Russell model. Psychol. Well-Being 4(1), 22 (2014) Lee, J.H., Bare, B., Meek, G.: How similar is too similar?: Exploring users’ perceptions of similarity in playlist evaluation. In: Proceedings of ISMIR, Miami, FL, USA, pp. 109–114 (2011) Li, Z., Hoiem, D.: Learning without forgetting. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 40.12, 2935–2947 (2018) Liang, D., Zhan, M., Ellis, D.P .: Content-aware collaborative music recommendation using pre-trained neural networks. In: Proceedings of ISMIR, Málaga, Spain, pp. 295–301 (2015) Lin, M., Chen, Q., Y an, S.: Network in network (2013). arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.4400 Logan, B.: Content-based playlist generation: Exploratory experiments. In: Proceedings of ISMIR, Paris, France (2002) Manning, C.D., Raghavan, P ., Schüze, H.: An Introduction to Information Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2009) McFee, B., Lanckriet, G.R.: The natural language of playlists. In: Proceedings of ISMIR, Miami, FL, USA, pp. 537–542 (2011) McFee, B., Lanckriet, G.R.: Hypergraph models of playlist dialects. In: Proceedings of ISMIR, Porto, Portugal, pp. 343–348 (2012) Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G.S., Dean, J.: Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In: Proceedings of NIPS, pp. 3111–3119 (2013) Nesterov, Y .: A method of solving a convex programming problem with convergence rate O(1/k2). Sov. Math. Dokl. 27(2), 372–376 (1983) Oramas, S., Nieto, O., Sordo, M., Serra, X.: A deep multimodal approach for cold-start music recommen- dation. In: Proceedings of DLRS Workshop at RecSys, Como, Italy, pp. 32–37 (2017) Pan, R., Zhou, Y ., Cao, B., Liu, N.N., Lukose, R., Scholz, M., Y ang, Q.: One-class collaborative ﬁltering. In: Proceedings of ICDM, Pisa, Italy, pp. 502–511 (2008) Platt, J.C., Burges, C.J., Swenson, S., Weare, C., Zheng, A.: Learning a Gaussian process prior for auto- matically generating music playlists. In: Proceedings of NIPS, pp. 1425–1432 (2002) Pohle, T., Pampalk, E., Widmer, G.: Generating similarity-based playlists using traveling salesman algo- rithms. In: Proceedings of DAFx, Madrid, Spain, pp. 220–225 (2005) Rabiner, L.R., Juang, B.H.: Fundamentals of Speech Recognition. PTR Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River (1993) Ricci, F., Rokach, L., Shapira, B.: Recommender Systems Handbook, 2nd edn. Springer, Berlin (2015) Simonyan, K., Zisserman, A.: V ery deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition. In: Proceedings of ICLR (2014) Sonnleitner, R., Widmer, G.: Robust quad-based audio ﬁngerprinting. IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio Speech Lang. Process. 24(3), 409–421 (2016) Srivastava, N., Hinton, G., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., Salakhutdinov, R.: Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 15(1), 1929–1958 (2014) Theano Development Team: A python framework for fast computation of mathematical expressions (2016). arXiv e-prints arXiv:1605.02688 V all, A., Eghbal-zadeh, H., Dorfer, M., Schedl, M.: Timbral and semantic features for music playlists. In: Machine Learning for Music Discovery Workshop at ICML, New Y ork, NY , USA (2016) V all, A., Eghbal-zadeh, H., Dorfer, M., Schedl, M., Widmer, G.: Music playlist continuation by learning from hand-curated examples and song features: Alleviating the cold-start problem for rare and out-of-set songs. In: Proceedings of DLRS Workshop at RecSys, Como, Italy, pp. 46–54 (2017a) V all, A., Schedl, M., Widmer, G., Quadrana, M., Cremonesi, P .: The importance of song context in music playlists. In: RecSys 2017 Poster Proceedings, Como, Italy (2017b) V all, A., Dorfer, M., Schedl, M., Widmer, G.: A hybrid approach to music playlist continuation based on playlist-song membership. In: Proceedings of SAC, Pau, France, pp. 1374–1382 (2018a) V all, A., Quadrana, M., Schedl, M., Widmer, G.: The importance of song context and song order in automated music playlist generation. In: Proceedings of ICMPC-ESCOM, Graz, Austria (2018b) 123

===== PAGE 45 =====
Feature-combination hybrid recommender systems for automated… 571 V all, A., Quadrana, M., Schedl, M., Widmer, G.: Order, context and popularity bias in next-song recom- mendations. Int. J. Multimed. Inf. Retr. (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s13735-019-00169-8 van den Oord, A., Dieleman, S., Schrauwen, B: Deep content-based music recommendation. In: Proceedings of NIPS, pp. 2643–2651 (2013) Zheleva, E., Guiver, J., Mendes Rodrigues, E., Mili-Frayling, N.: Statistical models of music-listening sessions in social media. In: Proceedings of WWW, Raleigh, NC, USA, pp. 1019–1028 (2010) Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations. Andreu Vall received his Licentiate Degree (MSc) in Mathematics from the Technical University of Cat- alonia in 2008. From 2009 to 2013 he worked as a university research assistant conducting research ﬁrst in the ﬁeld of geomatics, and later in operations research applied to the fashion retail industry. Since 2014 he is a Ph.D. student at the Institute of Computational Perception of the Johannes Kepler University Linz. His current research centers on machine learning approaches to hybrid music recommender systems, with a special focus on automated music playlist continuation. Matthias Dorfer studied medical informatics at Vienna University of Technology, Austria, with a focus on computational image analysis and machine learning. After ﬁnishing his master’s degree studies, he worked for 2 years as an industrial researcher in the ﬁeld of medical image analysis. Since April 2015, he has been a Ph.D. student in the Institute of Computational Perception, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria, under the supervision of Prof. Gerhard Widmer. His research interests are artiﬁcial neural networks, espe- cially multimodality deep learning, and audiovisual representation learning. Hamid Eghbal-zadeh is a Ph.D. student at Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria. He received his Mas- ter’s degree in Computer Engineering from the Shiraz State University, Iran in 2012. In 2014, he joined the Institute of Computational Perception at Johannes Kepler University. During the following years, he worked as a researcher on the topic of representation learning for sequential data including audio, music and genomic data. He is currently pursuing his Ph.D. and his focus of research is on representation learn- ing with incomplete information. Markus Schedl is Associate Professor at the Johannes Kepler University Linz/Institute for Computational Perception. He graduated in Computer Science from the Vienna University of Technology and earned his Ph.D. in Computer Science from the Johannes Kepler University Linz. He (co-)authored almost 200 ref- ereed conference papers and journal articles and is Associate Editor of the Springer International Journal of Multimedia Information Retrieval. His main research interests include web and social media mining, data analytics, information retrieval, recommender systems, multimedia, and music information research. Keki Burjorjee holds a Ph.D. in Computer Science from Brandeis University, USA, and is currently a Staff Scientist at Pandora Media Inc., the largest music streaming service in the USA. His research interests include large scale factorization based recommendation systems, probabilistic modeling, and evolutionary computation. At Pandora he has worked on station, playlist, and track recommendation, automatic genre tagging, and automatic playlist extension. Gerhard Widmer is Professor and Head of the Institute of Computational Perception at Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria, and leads the Intelligent Music Processing and Machine Learning Group at the Austrian Research Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (OFAI), Vienna, Austria. His research interests include AI, machine learning, and intelligent music processing, and his work is published in a wide range of scientiﬁc ﬁelds, from AI and machine learning to audio, multimedia, musicology, and music psychol- ogy. He is a Fellow of the European Association for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EurAI), has been awarded Austrias highest research awards, the START Prize (1998) and the Wittgenstein Award 2009), and cur- rently holds an ERC Advanced Grant for research on computational models of expressivity in music. 123

===== PAGE 46 =====
572 A. Vall et al. Aﬃliations Andreu Vall 1 · Matthias Dorfer 1 · Hamid Eghbal-zadeh 1 · Markus Schedl 1 · Keki Burjorjee 3 · Gerhard Widmer 1,2 Matthias Dorfer matthias.dorfer@jku.at Hamid Eghbal-zadeh hamid.eghbal-zadeh@jku.at Markus Schedl markus.schedl@jku.at Keki Burjorjee kburjorjee@pandora.com Gerhard Widmer gerhard.widmer@jku.at 1 Institute of Computational Perception, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Linz, Austria 2 Austrian Research Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Vienna, Austria 3 Pandora Media Inc., Oakland, CA, USA 123

===== PAGE 47 =====
© 2019. This work is published under http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/(the “License”). Notwithstanding the ProQuest Terms and Conditions, you may use this content in accordance with the terms of the License.